Definition of motor vehicle: The International Convention on Road Signs and Signals defines a motor or power driven vehicle as a self propelled road vehicle. Rail borne vehicles and country specifically mopeds which are not treated as motorcycles are exceptions. A second definition in this convention limits the term motor vehicle to those vehicles which are used for carrying persons or goods or for drawing on the road vehicles used for the carriage or persons or goods. Electrically powered non rail borne trolley buses are included in this definition. This definition however does not cover vehicles, such as agricultural tractors, which are only incidentally used for carrying persons or goods.
An appropriate definition is established for example in the German Road Traffic Act and in the laws of other countries.
Functional units of a motor vehicle A motor vehicle consists of a number of functional units . These are usually classified into drivetrain, drive unit, chassis, vehicle body, and electrical system. This classification is however not standardized.
The functional units are composed of the subsystems, which are interconnected. But there is also an interaction between the functional units. Thus, for example, the drive unit acts on the transmission unit with the transmission subsystem, which drives the wheels of the chassis functional unit via the drive shafts and the final drive differential.
Electrical and electronic systems have gradually found their way into all areas of a motor vehicle. They have replaced mechanical systems or else created completely new possibilities. Electrification of the drive and further developments in the field of automated driving have major impacts on motor vehicle development.
Classification of motor : vehicles Motor vehicles include motor cars, but also single track motorcycles . Commercial vehicles included trucks, motor buses, and tractors. Determination of motor vehicles Passenger cars Passenger cars Passenger cars have at least four wheels. They are also called automobiles. Passenger cars serve to transport persons and additionally luggage, but also goods. A trailer can also be towed.
vides an overview of the vehicle categories in Europe. This classification applies to the countries of the European Union and all other European countries.
least one rear axle, both of which can be driven simultaneously . The drive to one of the axles can be disengaged.
SUVs are based : in terms of design on off road vehicles, but do not satisfy all the above mentioned requirements. Off road capability varies from model to model. In fact, they are for the most part not used in off road applications at all.
Vehicle categories of other countries Vehicle categories of other countries Japanese legislation follows the classification of CARB. China and India follow the EU classification.
M Motor vehicles for carriage of passengers with at least four wheels M1 Vehicles with no more than eight seats O2 Trailers not exceeding 3.5 tons O3 Trailers not exceeding 10 tons O4 Trailers exceeding 10 tons
 Council Directive 87/403/EEC of 25 June 1987 supplementing Annex I to Directive 70/156/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type approval of motor vehicles and their trailers.
LDV Light duty vehicle LDT2 LLDT with LVW > 3,750 lbs LDT3 HLDT with ALVW < 5,750 lbs LDT4 HLDT with ALVW > 5,750 lbs Full  Size  Pickup  Truck Light truck with passenger compartment and open freight box, towing capability > 5,000 lbs, payload > 1,700 lbs MDPV Medium duty passenger vehicle,  Heavy duty vehicle with GVWR <10,000 lbs for carriage of up to 12 persons HDV Heavy duty vehicle with GVWR > 8,500 lbs, or curb weight > 6,000 lbs, or frontal surface area greater than 45 square feet
Quantities and units: In order to be able to express the values of physical quantities, a system of units is required which serves as the yardstick for every measurement. The value of the physical quantity is taken as the product of numerical value and unit. Such a system of units is the SI system, which was established in 1960 by the 11th General Conference on Weights and Measures . It has since then been adopted by over 50 countries.
In Germany the management of units is by law under the control of the Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt in Sevres near Paris.
Further units which are to this day commonly used are in Germany likewise permitted by law and are mentioned here as such.
SI units  SI means "Systeme International d'Unites" .
Definition of the base SI units In 2018 a fundamental change was made to the SI at the 26th General Conference, this change being adopted on 20 May 2019: Seven "defining constants" now form the foundation of the SI and therefore provide the basis for the definition of the base units and all further SI units .
Second The second, symbol s, is the SI unit of time. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the cesium frequency DnCs, the unperturbed ground state hyperfine transition frequency of the cesium 133 atom to be 9 192 631 770 when expressed in the unit Hz, which is equal to s 1.
In other words, one second is equal to the duration of 9 192 631 770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the energy of the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the unperturbed ground state of the 133Cs atom.
Meter The meter, symbol m, is the SI unit of length. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the speed of light in a vacuum c to be 299 792 458 when expressed in the unit m/s, where the second is defined in terms of DnCs.
In other words, one meter is the length of the path traveled by light in a vacuum during a time interval with duration of 1/299 792 458 of a second.
Base quantity  and symbol Base SI unit Name Symbol Length l meter m Mass m kilogram kg Time t second s Electric current I ampere A Thermodynamic  temperature T kelvin K Amount of substance n mole mol Luminous intensity I candela cd
Kilogram The kilogram, symbol kg, is the SI unit of mass. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the Planck constant h to be 6.62607015 x 10 34 when expressed in the unit J s, which is equal to kg m2 s 1, where the meter and the second are defined in terms of c and DnCs.
In other words, the unit kg is linked with the action, a quantity in theoretical physics with the unit kg m2 s 1. Together with the definitions of the second and the meter this leads to a definition of the kilogram as a function of the Planck constant h. Ampere The ampere, symbol A, is the SI unit of electric current. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the elementary charge e to be 1.602176634 x 10 19 when expressed in the unit C, which is equal to A s, where the second is defined in terms of DnCs.
In other words, an ampere is the current corresponding to the flow of 1 / per second.
Kelvin The kelvin, symbol K, is the SI unit of thermodynamic temperature. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the Boltzmann constant k to be 1.380649 x 10 23 when expressed in the unit J K 1, which is equal to kg m2 s 2 K 1, where the kilogram, the meter and the second are defined in terms of h, c and DnCs.
In other words, one kelvin is equal to the change of thermodynamic temperature that results in a change of thermal energy by 1.380649  10 23 J.
Mole The mole, symbol mol, is the SI unit of amount of substance. One mole contains exactly 6.02214076 x 1023 elementary entities. This number is the fixed numerical value of the Avogadro constant NA when expressed in the unit mol 1 and is called the Avogadro number. The amount of substance, symbol n, of a system is a measure of the number of specified elementary entities. An elementary entity may be an atom, a molecule, an ion, an electron, any other particle or a group of such particles of precisely specified composition. In other words, a mole is the amount of substance of a system that contains 6.02214076  1023 specified elementary entities.
Candela The candela, symbol cd, is the SI unit of luminous intensity in a given direction. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the luminous efficacy Kcd of monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 x 1012 Hz to be 683 when expressed in the unit lm W 1, which is equal to cd sr W 1 or cd sr kg 1 m 2 s3, where the kilogram, the meter and the second are defined in terms of h, c and DnCs.
In other words, one candela is the luminous intensity of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 x 1012 Hz and has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1/683 W sr 1.
Decimal fractions and multiples  of SI units Decimal fractions and multiples of SI units . The prefix symbol is placed without a gap in front of the unit symbol to form a coherent unit.
Quantity and : symbol Legal units Relationship Remarks and units  not to be used,  incl. their conversion SI Others Name 1. Length, area, volume.
Quantity and : symbol Legal units Relationship Remarks and units  not to be used,  incl. their conversion SI Others Name 3. Mass.
Acceler a ation 4 m/ s 2 Normal acceleration of free fall g 9.80665 m/s2 Angular o velocity 3 rad/s Angular a acceleration 3 rad/s2 1 The term "weight" is ambiguous in everyday usage; it is used to denote mass as well as weight .
2 Clock times: h, min, s written as superscripts. Example: 3h 25m 6s. 3 The unit rad can be replaced by the numeral 1 in calculations. 4 Acceleration is sometimes expressed in m/s2 as a multiple of gravitational acceleration g.
Quantity and : symbol Legal units Relationship Remarks and units  not to be used,  incl. their conversion SI Others Name 5. Force, energy, power.
Hardness Brinell and Vickers hardness are no longer given in  kp/mm2. Instead, an abbreviation of the relevant hardness is written as the unit after the numerical value used previously .
Quantity and : symbol Legal units Relationship Remarks and units  not to be used,  incl. their conversion SI Others Name 6. Viscosimetric quantities.
______ y  mile/gal 1 The quantity of heat which is required to heat 1 g water from 15 degC to 16 degC. 2 The quantity of heat which is required to heat 1 lb water from 63 degF to 64 degF.
Measurement is carried out by viscosimeter  in accordance  with the standard  DIN EN ISO 2431 A seconds Runout time from flow cup Engler number Relative runout time from Engler device: 1 degE 7.6 mm2/s RI seconds Runout time from Redwood I viscosimeter . Their values depend on the system of units and must be experimentally determined.
Hyperfine  DnCs frequency of  the cesium  atom 9 192 631 770 Hz Speed of light c  299 792 458  m __ s  Planck  h constant 6.626 070 15 10 34 J s Elementary e charge 1.602 176 634 10 19 C Boltzmann  k constant 1.380 649 10 23 J __ K  Avogadro  NA constant 6.022 14076 1023 mol 1 Luminous efficacy of radiation 683 lm W 1
 DIN EN ISO 2431: Paints and varnishes Determination of flow time by use of flow cups ; German version EN ISO 2431:2011.
___ Vm0   2.6867805 10 27 kg
Path, velocity and acceleration Path s is a limited distance, velocity u is the path covered during a specific time t. For a rotary motion angular velocity o is obtained from the angle ph covered during a specific time. A uniform motion exists when velocity u or rotational speed n  equals zero. A body is accelerated when there is a change of velocity. A motion is uniformly accelerated if acceleration is constant. In the case of negative acceleration, the motion is decelerated or braked.
tance r about a rotational axis at angular : velocity o, this generates a centrifugal force FZ which acts radially outwards from the center. A force which is applied at distance r from a center of rotation generates a moment. An accelerated rotary motion with rotating mass J causes a moment in the form of an acceleration or braking torque.
Work and energy When a force F moves a body by path s, work W is performed which is stored as energy in this body. Energy is therefore defined in physics as stored work. Conversely, an energy can perform work. A distinction is made in mechanics between kinetic and potential energy. Kinetic energy is the work that must be expended to accelerate a body with mass m or rotating mass J to velocity u or angular velocity o. Potential energy is the work that must be expended to raise a body to a height h. When a spring is tensioned, potential energy is stored which can perform work again when the spring is released.
__ 4 r 2) UAN0007 2Y y y y x x x ra r r r x x a c b R ri l l x R x r r
Conservation of energy : The law of conservation of energy states that the total energy in a closed system is constant. Energy can be neither created nor destroyed, but instead converted between different forms of energy or transmitted from one body to another.
Power Power is the work performed during a specific period of time. Because every power transfer is associated with loss, the output power is always less than the input power. The ratio of output to input power is called efficiency e and is therefore always less than 1.
Linear momentum and impulse Linear momentum p describes the motion of a body with mass, and is calculated as the product of moving mass m and velocity u. Every moving body can transmit its linear momentum during an impulse process to another body, as happens for example in a collision between two vehicles. The force acting on a body gives rise to a change of linear momentum, which is called force impulse I.
During a rotary motion angular momentum L is obtained from the product of rotating mass J and angular velocity o. A rotational impulse H is generated for example when two disks are jerkily coupled. Conservation of momentum The law of conservation of momentum states that the total momentum in a closed system is constant. It follows from this that the total momentum before and after an impulse must be equal.
Statics Statics is the science of equilibrium on a rigid body. A body is in equilibrium when it is at rest or is moving uniformly or in a straight line. Equilibrium prevails when the sum of the applied forces and moments in all directions is equal to zero.
the resultant force Fres is determined by means of a polygon of forces . When the polygon of forces is closed, the system of forces is in equilibrium.
The lever principle is encountered in many applications, ranging from simple pliers, scales and wrenches through gear wheels and belt drives, right down to the connecting rods in piston engines.
Very large application forces can be introduced in the smallest of spaces with the aid of wedges. Examples include wedges in shaft/hub connections and tapered connections for transmitting torques. However, both the screw and the clamping eccentric work according to the classic wedge principle.
Calculation of strength: Hooke's law In response to an external load a body is deformed and stresses are generated inside the material . Metals have linear elastic behavior until the yield point is reached. In other words, within this Hooke's range the component assumes its original length again when the load is reduced. The yield point Re is the limit between elastic and plastic deformation. Above the yield point the material begins to "creep" and then remains permanently deformed. The tensile strength Rm is the maximum load before the component cracks or breaks.
In the case of ductile materials with a pronounced yield point Re is always specified as the limit for dimensioning. The tensile strength is used for dimensioning only in the case of brittle materials which do not have a pronounced yield point .
Strength verification The aim of strength verification is to dimension components reliably and appropriately for the material involved. Strength verification in accordance with Figure 6 is conducted in four stages: 1. Determination of the external load  , 2. Calculation of the existing stress, 3. Choice of the material characteristic value, 4. Comparison of the existing stress with the material characteristic value.
Because tensile, compressive and bending stresses lie in one plane or act in the same direction, they can be cumulatively superimposed. Even the shear and torsional stresses can be added. However, if normal and shear stresses occur simultaneously in a component, a reduced stress must be created with a strength hypothesis because the material characteristic values were calculated from mono axial tensile and vibration fatigue tests.
FN Normal force, FR Friction force, u  Velocity, n Rotational speed, uT Tangential velocity at the    point of contact.
a) Asymmetrical pressure distribution, b) Resultant forces for calculation model. F Load, FN Normal force, FR Frictional force, R Radius of rolling body, x Lever arm for moment equilibrium.
Hydrostatics: Density and pressure Although fluids are compressible to a lesser extent, they can be viewed as being incompressible for most problems. In addition, since density is only slightly dependent on temperature, it can be taken as constant for many applications.
The amount of fuel available can be easily and reliably measured by analog sensors  in the fuel tank with the aid of buoyancy.
___ n  In the case of a flow within a pipe, the pipe diameter is used for L. Flow in a pipe becomes unstable or turbulent at Re > 2300. Since, in the case of gases with low flow velocities , compression is negligible in many flow processes, they are also governed by the laws of incompressible fluids.
Basic equations of flow mechanics: The most important basic equations of flow mechanics are the continuity equation and the Bernoulli equation. They describe the conservation of mass and energy in flowing fluids.
Here, A is the cross sectional area of the body on which the fluid flow is acting and cd an undefined coefficient of resistance, which is dependent on the shape of the body submerged in the fluid flow.
As it is extremely complex to calculate exactly the resistance to flow even for simple bodies, resistance to flow is usually determined experimentally. If the dimensions are large, the measurements are taken on downscaled models. As well as geometrical similarity, the forms of energy that occur in the original fluid flow and in the model flow must be proportional. This proportion is denoted by the Reynolds number Re.
Period The period T is the time taken for one complete cycle of a single oscillation. Amplitude The amplitude y is the maximum instantaneous value of a sinusoidally oscillating physical quantity.
Frequency The frequency f  is the number of oscillations in one second, the reciprocal value of the period of oscillation T.
Particle velocity Particle velocity u is the instantaneous value of the alternating velocity of a vibrating particle in its direction of vibration. It must not be confused with the velocity of propagation of a traveling wave .
Beats Beats occur when two sinusoidal oscillations, whose frequencies do not differ greatly, are superposed . They are periodic. Their basic frequency is the difference between the frequencies of the superposed sinusoidal oscillations.
Natural frequency The natural frequency is that frequency f at which an oscillating system can oscillate freely after being excited once . It is dependent only on the properties of the oscillating system.
Damping Damping is a measure of the energy losses in an oscillatory system when one form of energy is converted into another. The consequence is a decay of the oscillation .
Logarithmic decrement The logarithmic decrement L is the natural logarithm of the relationship between two extreme values of a damped natural oscillation which are separated by one period.
Forced oscillations Forced oscillations arise under the influence of an external physical force , which does not change the properties of the oscillator. The frequency of forced oscillations is determined by the frequency of the excitation.
Transfer function The transfer function is the quotient of amplitude of the observed state or output variable and the amplitude of excitation, plotted against the excitation frequency f or the excitation circuit frequency o. Resonance A resonance occurs when the transfer function attains its maximum value as the excitation frequency approaches the natural frequency.
Resonant frequency The resonant frequency is the excitation frequency at which the oscillator state variable attains its maximum value. Disregarding the damping, the resonant  frequency is equal to the natural frequency.
Half value width The half value width is the difference  between the frequencies at which the level of the observed variable has dropped to 1/ __ 2  0.707 of the maximum value.
Coupling If two oscillatory systems are coupled together mechanically by mass or elasticity, electrically by inductance or capacitance a periodic exchange of energy takes place between the systems.
Wave A wave is a spatial and temporal change of state of a continuum, which can be expressed as a unidirectional transfer of location of a certain state over a period of time. The matter that may be present in the space is not necessarily also transported.
Interference The principle of undisturbed superposition of waves is called interference. At every point in space, the instantaneous value of the resulting wave is equal to the sum of the instantaneous values of the individual waves.
Plane wave: A plane wave is a wave in which the surfaces of the same phase occur.
Standing waves occur, for example, when a plane wave is reflected on a plane wall which is vertical to the direction of wave propagation.
Harmonic factor The harmonic factor is the ratio of yeff to yrec. For a sine curve the harmonic factor is yeff /yrec 1.111.
Vibration isolation Active vibration isolation Active vibration isolation The machines to be isolated are to be mounted so that the dynamic forces transmitted to the base support are small.
One measure to be taken: The bearing point should be set below resonance so that the natural frequency lies below the lowest excitation frequency. Damping  impedes insulation. Low values can result in excessively high vibrations during  run up when the resonant range is passed through .
0.5 Amplitude ratio , x x ^ G ^ U FU ^ FG ^ r c FU FG r c Foundation xU xG a b UAN0088 1E UAN0015 1E
Passive vibration isolation: Passive vibration isolation The machines to be isolated are to be mounted so that vibrations and shocks reaching the base support are only transmitted to the machines to a minor extent. The measures to be taken are the same as those for active isolation. In many cases, flexible suspension or extreme damping is not practicable. To prevent the occurrence of resonance, the machine attachment should be so rigid that the natural frequency is far enough in excess of the highest excitation frequency which can occur .
Vibration absorption Vibration absorber  Vibration absorber  with fixed natural frequency with fixed natural frequency By tuning the natural frequency fT of an absorption mass with a flexible, lossfree coupling to the excitation frequency, vibrations acting on the machine are completely absorbed . Only the absorption mass still vibrates. The effectiveness of the absorption decreases as the excitation frequency changes. Damping prevents complete absorption. However, appropriate tuning of the absorber frequency and an optimum damping ratio produce broadband vibration reduction, which remains effective when the excitation frequency changes.
Vibration absorber  Vibration absorber  with varying natural frequency with varying natural frequency Rotational oscillations with excitation frequencies proportional to the rotational speed . The vibration absorption is effective at all rotational speeds. Vibration absorption is also possible for oscillators with several degrees of freedom and interrelationships, as well as by the use of several absorption masses.
Modal analysis The dynamic behavior .
A time invariant and linear elastic structure is an essential precondition for model creation. Every oscillation of the structure can be represented from the eigenvectors and eigenvalues. It is, however, only  observed at a limited number of points in the possible oscillation directions and at defined frequency intervals.
Numerical modal analysis The geometry, material data, and marginal conditions must be known. The basis for numerical modal analysis is a multibody system or finite element model of the structure. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be calculated from this by solving an eigenvalue problem.
Numerical modal analysis manages without a prototype of the structure and can already be used at an early stage of development. However, it is often the case that precise knowledge concerning the structure's fundamental properties  are lacking, which means that the modal model can sometimes be inaccurate. As well as this, the error is unidentified. One remedy is to adjust the model with the results of an experimental modal analysis.
Experimental modal analysis A prototype of the structure is required for experimental modal analysis. Analysis is based on measurements of transfer functions. To this end, either the structure is excited at one point in the frequency range of interest and the oscillation  responses measured at several points, or it is excited at many points in succession, where the oscillation responses are always measured at the same point. The modal model is derived from the matrix of the transfer function . An impulse hammer or an electrodynamic or hydraulic "shaker" is used as the means of excitation. The response is measured with acceleration sensors or a laser vibrometer.
Experimental modal analysis can also be used to validate numerical analysis. Simulation calculations can then be carried out on the validated numerical model. In the response calculation, the response of the structure to a defined excitation is calculated, an excitation which corresponds, for example, to test bay conditions.
By means of structure modifications , the vibrational behavior can be optimized to the level required by operating conditions. When the modal models produced by both processes are compared with each other, the modal model resulting from an analytical modal analysis is more detailed than that from an experimental modal analysis, due to the greater number of degrees of freedom in the analytical process. This applies in particular to simulation calculations based on the model.
Acoustics is a branch : of the general science of vibration and oscillation concerned with the vibration of air particles audible to humans. This  process of vibration gives rise to pressure differences in air which the human ear can detect. Vibrations are generated on an automobile by a variety of excitations which partly excite the airborne noise  directly or can propagate via the vehicle structure and from there to the airborne noise.
DIN 1320 ) Sound Mechanical vibrations and waves in an elastic medium in the audible frequency band are called sound. Ultrasound High frequency vibrations above the frequency range of human hearing are called ultrasound.
Infrasound Infrasound is the range of very low frequencies which can no longer be detected by the human hear, but can still be felt by the body.
Specific acoustic impedance Specific acoustic impedance Z denotes the wave impedance of a medium and is a measure of the ability of a medium to transmit sound waves.
Figuratively speaking, the formula describes the coupling of a vibrating particle to its neighboring particles. The coupling is much less pronounced in gases than in solid media; the particles can vibrate more freely.
Hearing dynamics: Hearing dynamics is the ability of the  human ear to perceive noises from the threshold of audibility up to the pain threshold. It corresponds to pressure differences from the threshold of audibility, which is generally defined as 20 uPa, up to the pain threshold of approx. 200 pascal. This results in very high hearing  dynamics of around 1:10,000,000.
Propagation of sound In general, sound propagates spherically from its source. In a free sound field, the sound pressure level decreases by 6 dB each time the distance from the sound source is doubled . Reflecting objects influence the sound field, and the rate at which the sound level is reduced as a function of the distance from the sound source is lower. Moving vehicles have a spherical propagation of sound, but are considered to be line sources. The damping of sound each time the distance is doubled is considerably less and ranges, depending on the vehicle and the computing model, between 3 dB and 4.5 dB each time the distance is doubled.
Doppler effect For moving sound sources: As the sound source approaches the observer, the  perceived pitch is higher than the actual pitch; as distance increases, the perceived pitch falls.
in different materials Material/medium Sound  velocity c  in m/s Wavelength l  in m at  1,000 Hz Air, 20 degC, 1,014 hPa  343 0.343 Water, 10 degC 1,440 1.44 Rubber  5,000 5.0
Sound spectrum: Every noise is a mixture of components with different frequencies and levels. The sound pressure level components can be broken down by frequencies with a frequency analysis. These spectra are distinguished from each other, depending on the type of frequency resolution.
Third octave band spectrum Third octave band spectrum The sound pressure levels are determined and represented in terms of thirdoctave bandwidth. In the case of the third, the fundamental frequencies behave in a ratio of 1:21/3. The bandwidth referred to the center frequency is relatively constant, as in the case of the octave band spectrum.
The frequencies are defined in DIN EN 61260 . Frequency analyses in the  octave and third octave ranges produce bar charts with the frequency on the  x axis and the associated levels on the y axis.
Narrow band spectrum Narrow band spectrum Unlike the above spectra, it is possible to use Fourier analysis to analyze frequency components with constant frequency bandwidths. This results in very many finer frequency resolutions compared with the above spectra. These are shown as line graphs, which strictly speaking are not correct, but enable different analyses to be compared.
Such narrow band analyses are also frequently linked with a further piece of information such as, for example, the rotational speed of an engine so that a frequency analysis is available for each rotational speed between the sound source and the impact location. This reduces the effect of the sound source.
Sound damping, sound absorption In the case of sound damping and sound absorption, sound energy can penetrate into the medium. Here, energy is converted into heat when reflected on peripheries, but also during propagation in the medium.
Modern noise baffles work on the principle of sound damping, i. e. sound is  reflected. But parts of the sound energy are also absorbed by the baffles.
Low noise design A low noise design is a design which is structurally optimized in accordance with acoustic considerations in order to minimize the inherent sound radiation and the propagation of sound within the structure. Simulation techniques for calculating and optimizing acoustic properties are frequently used.
Noise reduction Noise reduction involves reducing the noise emissions of a complete system, primarily by means of low noise designs and, secondly, through the reduction of sound propagation through the use of insulating, damping and absorbing materials.
Measured quantities : for noise emissions Sound field quantities are usually given as effective values. Because humans perceive frequencies with varying loudness, weighting filters are used to adapt the measured levels in each frequency range to the human hearing properties. The most common weightings are A for sound as encountered, for example, in the automobile sector, and C for clearly louder noises such as, for example, in the aviation field. The corresponding weighting is appended to the symbol, such as, for example, dB .
Sound power cannot be measured  directly. It is calculated based on quantities of the sound field which surrounds the source. The sound pressure levels Lp or the sound intensity levels LI are usually used for the calculation.
0 dB 3.0 dB 1 dB 2.5 dB 2 dB 2.1 dB 3 dB 1.8 dB 4 dB 1.5 dB 6 dB 1.0 dB 8 dB 0.6 dB 10 dB 0.4 dB
Protection against excessive noise and in particular environmental noise is gaining increasing importance as an environmental theme. The recording and evaluation of noise immissions forms the basis for efficient noise reduction.
Rating sound level The effect of noise on a human being is evaluated using the rating sound level L  can be taken into account through level allowances.
Energy equivalent continuous  sound level In the case of noises which fluctuate over time, the mean A weighted sound pressure level resulting from the individual sound pressure levels and the individual exposure times equals the energy equivalent continuous sound level LAeq .
Noise indices The EU Directive 2002/49/EC defines the noise indices binding on the EU Lden and Lnight as standard descriptors for offending noise over a full day are taken into consideration for Lden in contrast to LAeq.
Sound exposure level The sound exposure level SEL is used to evaluate individual excessive noise events  in sensitive conservation areas. For the purpose of calculation the sound energy of the complete event is recorded and its energy is then distributed to 1 second. It is therefore done as though the event always happens within a period of one second. The sound level is then calculated on this basis.
noise pollution as per TI Noise Day Night Purely industrial areas 70 dB Health resorts, hospitals, etc.
Perceived sound levels: The human ear can distinguish approximately 300 levels of acoustic intensity and 3,000 to 4,000 different frequencies .
The phon unit and the definition of loudness in "sone" provide a rough approximation of subjective sound level perception. Sound level measurements alone do not suffice to define the nuisance and disturbance potential of noise emanating from machinery and equipment. A hardly perceptible ticking noise can thus be perceived as extremely disturbing, even in an otherwise loud environment.
Loudness level The loudness level LS is a comparative measure of the intensity of the subjective perception of a sound, measured in "phon". The loudness level of a sound  is the sound pressure level of a standard pure tone which, under standard listening conditions, is judged by a normal observer to be equally loud. The standard noise level is a plane sound wave at a frequency of 1,000 Hz impinging on the observer's head from the front. This is known internationally as the "loudness level". A difference of 8 to 10 phon is perceived as twice or half as loud.
Phon The standard pure tone judged as being equally loud has a specific value in dB. This value is given as the loudness level of the tested sound, and has the designation "phon". As human perception of sound is frequency dependent, the dB values of the tested sound for notes, for example, do not agree with the dB values of the standard pure tone. The connection between curves of equal sound level perception and sound pressure in decibels is always empirically determined. These curves were published for the first time in 1933 by Fletcher and Munson. They provided the basis for the isophone curves in accordance with DIN ISO 226 used today. Figure 2 shows curves based on this standard.
There is a DIN loudness standard for calculating stationary sound using tertiary levels . This procedure takes into account both frequency weighting and the screening effects of hearing.
correction values for the sound level to take into account human hearing Frequency Level correction 100 1,000 10,000 Hz 10 1 60 80 40 20 0 A filter 20 B filter C filter D filter SAN0180 1E
Articulation index: The basic prerequisite for recognizing speech is the correct transmission wherever possible of the sound waves of what is spoken from the sender  offers a computing model for predicting speech intelligibility in the event of interference noise. It is assumed here that the speech information is distributed to the different frequency bands of the acoustic signal. Each band then makes a contribution to speech intelligibility. If a band has a signal to noise ratio of more than 15 dB, the speech component in this band is evaluated as being intelligible. The sum total of all the bands with this noise ratio is multiplied by their specific weighting factor to give the articulation index AI in %. _________________________________ References References DIN EN ISO 80000 8: Quantities and units Part 8: Acoustics.
 Sixth General Administrative Regulation on the Federal Immission Protection Law .
 Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating to the assessment and  management of environmental noise.
Sensation of pain 4 engine airplane Normal conversation Radio at low volume Living room by day Living room at night Ticking of a clock Rustling of leaves Threshold of audibility UAN0027 3E Sound pressure level above 20 uPa Frequency 120 dB 100 80 60 40 20 0 10 0.03 0.02 0.1 1 10 20 kHz 20 60 40 80 100 Threshold of audibility phon
Geometric optics The description of optical systems can be limited to two models geometric optics and wave optics. Geometric optics are much larger than the wavelength of light.
Effects such as interference, diffraction and polarization are described in physics by wave optics. This is concerned with the propagation of light in the form of a wave. Basic principles of geometric optics A large part of the imaging systems used in optics can be described by geometric optics. Radiation propagation is explained by "light beams" and can be described by means of simple geometric laws.
Designation Wavelength range Gamma radiation 0.1...10 pm X radiation 10 pm to 10 nm Ultraviolet radiation 10...380 nm Visible radiation 380...780 nm Infrared radiation 780 nm to 1 mm Millimeter waves 10...100 km
at the interface between two media with different refractive indices a Medium 1 with refractive index n1, b Medium 2 with refractive index n2.
UAN0028 1Y SAN0198E 1 3 2 e1 e3 e2 a b Angle of incidence ie Reflection coefficient R 20deg 0 100 % 80 60 40 20 0 40deg 60deg 80deg 100deg
Optical components Spherical lenses Spherical lenses The optical effect and the imaging property of a lens are determined by the shape of the interfaces and by the refractive  index of the lens material . The imaging properties of light beams can be determined using Snell's law of refraction. The functioning principle of a lens is divided into two subgroups based on its shape .
Reflectors: Reflectors Reflectors . Reflectors are used in among other things headlights, where they specifically direct and concentrate light.
The function of reflector is to capture light from the headlight bulb, to achieve as great a range as possible, and to influence the distribution of the light on the road in such a way as to satisfy the legal requirements. Design places additional demands on the headlights.
Whereas previously almost exclusively paraboloids were used for reflectors, the above mentioned, partly contradictory  requirements can today sometimes only be satisfied by stepped reflectors, freeform surfaces or new headlight concepts .
Basically speaking, the larger the lens aperture area, the greater the headlight range that can be achieved. On the other hand, the luminous efficiency increases with the size of the solid angle captured by the reflector.
Color filters Color filters For special applications, e. g. lights and lamps on vehicles, there are precise regulations regarding the wavelength of the light used to suit the specific purpose . Color filters are used here to attenuate or suppress unwanted spectral ranges.
Wave optics The previous considerations only took into account macroscopic systems, i. e. the imaging elements considered were much larger than the wavelength of the observed light beam. Wave optics is concerned with systems in which light is  described as an electromagnetic wave. The color of the radiation is defined by the wavelength. Thus, monochromatic light is made up only of light waves of one wavelength, whereas white lights contains light waves of different wavelengths.
Polarization Polarization is also taken into account when a system is considered from the wave optics standpoint. This describes the orientation of the waves or the oscillations in relation to the plane of incidence. There are three different types of polarization: linear, circular and elliptical. In the case of linear polarization, the amplitude of the electric field varies with a constant direction of propagation; in the case of circular polarization, the direction varies while the amplitude of the electric field remains constant. Elliptical polarization describes a mixed form of linear and circular polarization.
SAN0200Y SAN0201E P A F Angle of incidence ie Reflection coefficient Rs,Rp Rs Rp 20deg 0deg 100 % 80 60 40 20 0 40deg 60deg 80deg 100deg
p polarization, is divided into two differ : ent curves. The plane perpendicular to the plane of propagation is called the plane of oscillation. It follows that only waves whose electric field components oscillate in the plane of oscillation are polarizable. These are also called transversal waves  oscillate in the direction of propagation and are therefore not polarizable. Interference The superposition of two waves of equal wavelength can lead to interference. According to the superposition principle, places of constructive and places of  destructive interference are formed here. An interference pattern with interference maxima and interference minima is produced. An established example of this is Young's doubles slit experiment , which proved for the first time the wave nature of light.
Diffraction Diffraction phenomena of light waves can also be described using wave optics. The term diffraction is used to refer to the situation where an optical wave encounters an obstacle shown in Figure 7.
by diffraction of an optical system L Lens, S1, S2 Point sources, x1, x2 Imaging of point sources, dmin Minimum resolving angle, I Intensity profile.
If diffraction is disregarded, optical systems can achieve an infinite resolution. Diffraction significantly reduces the resolving capacity of any optical system .
for the minimum angle. From this, at a distance of 25 cm to the eye, the minimum resolvable distance between S1 and S2 is calculated at 0.11 mm.
Lighting quantities Light sources have on the basis of their nature radiation of different intensities and different wavelengths. The light source is classified by reference to the characteristic wavelength into the wavelength spectrum.
Physical characteristic quantities have become established for the change in  intensity of the light source and to describe the effect of light on human beings. A distinction is made here between radiometric and photometric characteristic quantities. In photometry the human eye is evaluated as a detector. This is confined to the ultraviolet . Radiation quantities Radiant energy Radiant energy Qe The radiant energy Qe comprises the total energy of the light wave.
Radiant intensity : Radiant intensity Ie Radiant intensity Ie denotes the radiant flux dPhe emitted by a point wave in a particular direction .
Irradiation Irradiation He Irradiation He denotes the proportion of the radiant energy dQ that strikes per time dt a surface element dA.
Lighting quantities in photometry Spectral luminous efficiency Spectral luminous efficiency V.
SAN0205E Wavelength l Spectral luminous efficiency V 
Luminous flux Luminous flux Ph The luminous flux Ph denotes the weighting of the radiometric radiant flux Phe with the wavelength dependent efficiency curve K of the human eye. The luminous flux Ph determines the light output radiated into the totality of solid angles. All further photometric quantities are linked with the luminous flux.
Lumination Lumination H The lumination H is calculated from the illuminance EV that strikes the surface dA over a period of time dt.
Contrast Contrast The contrast determines the luminance ratio between two neighboring surfaces or the maximum difference in intensity within an illuminated .
The small area contrast for alternating black and white lines can also be determined. This is a measure for the specification of an optical lighting system to shown fine details on a screen. Both vertical and horizontal lines are measured for this purpose.
the atoms or the molecules of the active medium in an excited state .
h is Planck's quantum of action and c the : speed of light in a vacuum. For h and c the following values apply: h 6.62606957 10 34 Js c 300,000,000 m/s The resonator consists of mirror surfaces at the ends of the active medium and causes the spontaneously emitted photons to be reflected back into the active medium. As they pass through the active medium again they cause new photons of equal wavelength and identical phase position to be emitted. This is called stimulated emission.
The resonator is responsible for radiation amplification and for the desired beam characteristic. The laser beam emerges at the end of the resonator via a semi transparent mirror.
Depending on the active medium and the laser type, lasers can be operated with continuous wave radiation or in pulsed mode with pulse lengths down to below 1 fs .
Areas of application Laser measuring technology permits the noncontact, non interacting testing of production tolerances of superfinished surfaces . Resolutions in the nm range are achieved using interferometric methods.
Lasers facilitate high precision, flexible and high speed material processing/  machining in production engineering. For example, hole diameters of 30 um can be achieved with laser drilling.
Further laser applications in technology are holography , material processing/machining, microsurgery, and transmitters for data transmission in optical waveguides.
Specific regulations are to be observed when handling laser products. Laser products are classified according to potential hazards. For details, refer to DIN EN ISO 60825 .
Optical fibers/waveguides Design Optical fibers/waveguides transmit under controlled conditions electromagnetic waves in the ultraviolet ranges of the spectrum. They are made of quartz, glass, or polymers, usually in the form of fibers or channels created in transparent materials with a core whose refractive index is usually higher than that of the cladding. Thus, light launched into the core is retained in that area by means of refraction or total reflection and routed.
Step index and graded index fibers are : multimode fibers, i. e. various oscillation modes of the light waves can be propagated along then at different speeds. The different oscillation modes of the light wave are dependent on the geometry and the material properties of the substrate material. Polymer fibers are always step index fibers. Monomode fibers are, thanks to their geometry and the material used, designed in such a way that only the fundamental mode of the light wave can be propagated. Depending on the structure configuration, photonic crystal fibers guide one or more modes.
Properties Glass optical fibers have a high degree of transparency in the range from ultraviolet to infrared. Losses occur primarily due to the contamination of the fiber material used in the manufacturing process. Thus, H2O molecules absorbed from the ambient air generate absorption band in the spectrum of the optical fibers. At 950 nm, 1,240 nm and 1,380 nm the transparency of the optical fibers is reduced by the absorption of the H2O molecules in the glass fiber. When the spectrally resolved absorption of optical fibers is considered, minima are to be seen at 850 nm, 1,310 nm and 1,550 nm, i. e. attenuation is particularly low for the wavelengths 850 nm, 1,310 nm and 1,550 nm. Synthetic fibers absorb above 850 nm and below 450 nm.
The differences in dispersion and propagation time of the various modes cause an increasing broadening of the light pulses as the length of the fiber increases, and thus restrict the bandwidth. In photonic crystal fibers, it is possible by means of appropriate microstructuring of the core the influence the dispersion and the efficiency of nonlinear effects to achieve desired results.
Optical fibers can be used within the temperature range of 40 to 135 degC; special versions can even be used up to 800 degC.
Areas of application: The main area of application for optical fibers/waveguides is in data transmission. Synthetic fibers are preferred for use in the LAN  field. Graded index fibers are the most suitable for medium ranges. Only monomode fibers are used for long distance data transmission. In fiber optic networks, erbium doped glass fibers serve as optical amplifiers. Here, the transported radiation can be boosted by additional optical pumping with a semiconductor source.
Optical fibers/waveguides are used in vehicles in the MOST bus. The required compliance of bending radii means that installation in motor vehicles is critical. If the bending radii are too small, the attenuation is too great .
 E. Hecht: Optik. 5th Ed., Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag, 2009.
Basic principles: System Thermodynamic systems are typically divided into three types. What all the systems have in common is that they are delimited from the surroundings by the system boundary within which the system is located.
Isolated system Isolated system The system boundary of an isolated system is impermeable to all types of heat Q, work W and mass m .
Closed system Closed system A closed system allows the exchange of heat and work with the surroundings across the system boundary, but not of mass .
Open system Open system Finally, in an open system heat, work and mass can be exchanged across the system boundary with the surroundings .
State and process variables State variables State variables In thermodynamics states of systems and  processes are described by way of state variables such as for example temperature T, pressure p, volume V or mass m. The changes to these variables are called changes of state. The state of a system is described uniquely by means of the state variables. To describe the state of a system which undergoes a change of state from state 1 to state 2, it is therefore not necessary to know the path taken  between initial and final states, but solely to know the relevant state variables. Process and Process and process variables process variables Generally speaking, the stringing together of changes of state is called a process. In contrast to state variables, the process variables required to describe the process depend on the path between initial and final states. Work and heat are thus process variables, the type and with it also the magnitude of the work input differ e. g. depending on process control.
l Thermal conductivity W/ r Density kg/ m 3 n Kinematic viscosity m2/s s Stefan Boltzmann constant s 5.6704 10 8 W/m2K4 W/m2K4
When a system runs through a sequence : of processes and ends again in the initial state, this is called a cycle. Cycles are  important for describing many technical applications .
Intensive and Intensive and extensive state variables extensive state variables State variables can be further subdivided into intensive and extensive variables. When an existing system is subdivided into two parts, all the variables whose values are maintained in the two new systems are called intensive variables .
In contrast to work, heat Q is a form of energy that occurs in an unordered way. When energy is supplied to a system for example by an electric heater, the change in the system's state of equilibrium is caused by heat, but not by work, which in this example is equal to zero.
The two variables work and heat are counted positively when they are supplied to a system. When work or heat is rejected, they are negative. This equates to a system egotistical standpoint.
Laws of thermodynamics: Zeroth law Two systems which are each in thermal equilibrium with a third system are also in thermal equilibrium with each other. All the systems thus have the same temperature.
First law The first law of thermodynamics states that energy cannot be created or destroyed, but only converted from form to another, e. g. heat to work.
For an isolated system, in which there are no flows of mass or energy across the system boundaries, the sum of all the  energy changes equals zero.
The sum of the change in the internal  energy DU and the kinetic energy DEkin, and the potential energy DEpot of the system is, therefore, the sum of the quantity of heat Q12 added and the work W12 done on the system .
A perpetuum mobile of the first kind violates the first law of thermodynamics in that it creates "energy from nothing" or presupposes an efficiency of more than 100 %.
In other words, the transferred quantity of heat dQ is divided by the temperature T at the point of heat exchange. If therefore a quantity of heat dQ is isothermally added for example to a system, this results in an increase in the statistical fluctuation of the kinetic energy of the atoms and also an increase in its Entropy by the value dS.
For all irreversible changes of state and thus for all real technical processes it follows as a result of energy dissipation that entropy production is positive. In the case of a reversible process, however, no entropy is created. To summarize, it can therefore be stated that the rate of entropy production is never negative and thus: dS >= 0.
A perpetuum mobile of the second type : violates the second law of thermodynamics, while it can perfectly comply with the first law. The second main law states that it is not possible to convert heat into work when the ambient temperature stays the same. Nor is it possible to convert a quantity of heat which exists at a temperature level above the surroundings fully into work.
when for example from the first law the resulting temperature change is to be  calculated after a certain quantity of heat has been added.
pressure for some gases Values apply to 1 bar and 293.15 K Nitrogen 2.160
Here a and b are substance specific variables, taking into account the influence of internal pressure a/u 2, resulting from molecular attraction, and the specific volume b of the molecules. There are a large number of other real gas equations as well as this equation. For these and further details, refer to the further literature .
areas enclosed by the cycle represent : here the input work in the pV diagram and the added heat in the TS diagram .
For technical applications the real sequences are approached by comparison cycles. Here the entire cycle is subdivided into different reversibly accepted subcycles. The latter can be described by means of simple changes of state . In additional to simple describability, such idealized comparison cycles can be used as reference for comparing real machines as they represent the optimum in the respective process control.
The Carnot cycle has extra significance because although in reality it can only be approximately represented at great expense it describes the describes the maximum amount of utilizable energy  and the maximum possible efficiency can be achieved with it.
The achieved efficiency is, for the same compression ratio, lower than in the constant volume cycle e. However, because diesel engines are typically operated with a higher compression ratio, their efficiency is generally better. The aim of development for diesel engines is therefore to deliver a high peak pressure.
The two curves in Figure 9 relate to the : phase boundary lines . The saturatedliquid line represents the range of the just boiling liquid, the saturated vapor line that of the saturated vapor. Below these two lines is the wet steam region, i.e., the region in which liquid and gaseous phases exist together. The summit of the curves is called the critical point.
In automotive applications the ClausiusRankine cycle is used for example in the field of waste heat recovery as a comparison cycle. The engine or exhaust gas waste heat supplies the required heat here for the cycle steps 2 5. A turbine or a piston engine for example which makes energy available in mechanical form can be used as the engine for expansion .
Thermal conduction Thermal conduction In the case of thermal conduction, heat is transferred on the molecular level. Heat is transferred here as a result of an impressed temperature gradient by a solid body or a static medium convection.
Thermal radiation Thermal radiation In the case of thermal radiation, energy is transferred in the form of electromagnetic waves. The mechanism of heat transfer from one body to another is not matteror substance related and is therefore also possible in a vacuum.
a) In the pV diagram, b) In the TS diagram. 1 Saturated liquid line, 2 Saturated vapor line, 3 Critical point. SAN0235 1E 6 2 5 3 4 1 Pressure p Volume V a 5 6 1 2 3 4 Entropy S Temperature T b 2 1 3
thermal conduction through a layered, flat wall T1 d1 d2 dn Tb T2 Ta d l1 l2 ln q A * q* SAN0237Y T1u T1 dx dT T2 T2u x1 x2 Distance x Temperature T d q*
The reciprocal value of the total thermal resistance is therefore made up additively of the reciprocal values of the individual thermal resistances and behaves as in a parallel connection.
_____ ln    , where T1 is the temperature on the inner side and T2 the temperature on the outer side.
Because of the different surface areas on the inner and outer sides of the tube the temperature assumes a logarithmic characteristic in the tube wall.
thermal conduction  through a cylindrical tube wall 1 Temperature characteristic  over the tube cross section, r1 Inside radius of tube, r2 Outside radius of tube, l Length of tube, T1 Temperature at inside radius, T2 Temperature at  outside radius.
Convective heat transfer: The heat transfer coefficient a has already been introduced. It is dependent on a variety of influencing variables, such as, for example, temperature, density,  geometry, type of flow problem for which there are only closed analytical solutions in exceptional cases. Heat transfer coefficients are therefore often determined on the basis of numerical solutions or directly from tgen.experiments. The functional dependencies for the heat transfer coefficients can be found from these on the basis of dimensional analysis and similarity relationships.
Here c is the flow velocity, L a length characteristic of the application , and n the kinematic viscosity of the fluid.
The correlations for some selected cases with forced convection are set out in the following. The correlations in each case for the averaged values together with their range of application are specified here. The heat transfer coefficients can be calculated with the Nusselt numbers determined from them and the definition of these.
Here, TW is the wall temperature and TF the averaged fluid temperature. The Nusselt number must be evaluated for the averaged fluid temperature because this changes during an inner flow from inlet to outlet.
Thermal radiation Thermal radiation depends only on the type and the temperature of the radiating body. When radiation strikes a body, the following phenomena are observed: Part of the incident radiation is reflected . Due to the conservation of energy, it follows that the sum of these three energy components is equal to the amount of energy of the incident radiation.
 Black body radiator 1.00 Aluminum, unmachined 0.07 Aluminum, polished 0.04 Cast iron, rough, oxidized 0.94 Cast iron, turned 0.44 Copper, oxidized 0.64 Copper, polished 0.05 Brass, matt 0.22 Brass, polished 0.05 Steel, matt, oxidized 0.96 Steel, polished, oil free 0.06 Steel, polished, oiled 0.40
The history of electricity goes back around : 3,000 years. For a long time electrical effects were subject to mysterious interpretations. Only in the 19th and 20th centuries were scientists able to describe these effects more accurately through scheduled experimentation and exact measurement. It was recognized that most processes run according to certain laws. The sensible application of these laws resulted in the rapid development of electrical engineering and for some decades now electronics. Electrical engineering predominantly comprises areas in which the energy content of electricity plays a role while electronic devices are used to measure and control this energy. There are numerous uses for devices which comprise electrical and electronic components. A clear distinction between these two areas is often not possible.
Basic principles of electricity: Atomic structure All matter consists of tiny building blocks called atoms orbit a common nucleus, the Sun, serve as the model for the atomic structure. Materials which are composed of atoms of the same type are called elements.
Today we know that electricity is a property of electrons. These smallest particles orbit the nucleus, consisting of protons and neutrons, at high speed. Depending on the element in question, its atoms contain a different number of electrons on different paths, the electron shells. An electron carries the smallest occurring quantity of electricity; the designation "negative" was coined for this type of electric charge. The nuclear particles are neutrons and protons. The latter carry the same quantity of electricity as the electrons. But because their electric charge is reversed, they behave like electrons and are positive. These positive protons determine, together with the electrically neutral neutrons, the quantity of electricity.
Because the electrons orbit the nucleus at high speed, they would be thrown from their path by centrifugal force if the two opposing charges in the atom it is possible even to release electrons under certain preconditions from the atomic union of a material.
The electrons on the outermost shell of the atoms determine both the electrical and the chemical behavior of a material and establish the bond with neighboring atoms of other or identical elements. These electrons participating in the bonds are called valence electrons. Because only valence electrons participate in electrical processes, the atom model can be further simplified. Accordingly, this model consists of the electrically effective electrons of the outermost shell and a positive kernel, which contains the nucleus and the electrons of the remaining shells. In the copper model each kernel has a valence electron. Ions Ions Special measures, e.g., mechanical or chemical effects, can be used to separate or add one or more valence electrons in an atom. This atom is then no longer electrically neutral and is known as an ion. Atoms that lack electrons are not freely moving.
Charge quantity: The smallest possible charge quantity is the elementary charge; the electron symbol for the charge quantity is Q. In contrast to water droplets, it is not the mass of the electrons that is considered here, but only its electrical property, the charge. This has a quantitative character and quantity of electricity is therefore synonymous with electric charge. The unit of charge quantity is the "coulomb" with the symbol C.
This value is obtained from the already established unit "ampere" in accordance with the SI system participate in electrical and electronic processes. It is therefore natural to distill a large number of elementary charges down to a "handy" measure. From the size of elementary charge e: 6.3 trillion elementary charges equal 1 coulomb.
A voltage source and a complete circuit are required to generate a current flow is the same at all points.
The current flow can be discerned when an electric light bulb lights up. All electrical effects involve the progression of electric charge carriers. Negative and positive charge carriers often participate in the conduction processes in the same device. Normally only the conduction electrons in metals are considered.
Technical current direction Technical current direction That direction in which positive charge carriers were to move it they were present is defined as the technically positive current direction. The technical current direction is therefore opposite to the direction of electron movement . In the case of the movement of positive ions, the technical current direction and the direction of movement of the charge carriers are identical.
Voltage Voltage is obtained when the positive charge carriers and the negative charge carriers at the positive terminal. The negatively charged electrons of a connected conductor are therefore attracted by the positive terminal and repelled by the negative terminal. Because a large number of conduction electrons is available in the conductor, this effect continues and an electron stream flows from the negative terminal to the positive terminal.
The voltage is the cause of the current. The current direction depends on the polarity of the voltage and on the type of charge carriers participating in the current flow. Positive ions in an electrically conductive liquid move for example from the positive terminal , i.e., in the opposite direction to the electron stream in a conductor. The positive direction of the technical current is defined by a standard from positive to negative.
Crucial to the occurrence of a voltage are different electric charges at the terminals of the voltage generators. The effect of the voltage corresponds to a force that sets the electric charge carriers . In contrast, voltage can be present even if there is no current flowing, e.g., between the terminals of a voltage generator.
i.e., by around 0.1 mm. This produces a speed of approximately 0.1 mm/s! At this speed an electron to move through a wire 1 m long needs around 10,000 seconds .
Practice shows that a switched on desk lamp for example lights up instantly when it is connected to the power socket. Voltage as the cause of current must therefore cover the distance .
R Line resistance in O, l  Conductor length in m, A Conductor cross section in mm2, r Resistivity in .
resistivity r and its reciprocal value, the conductivity g. Different materials must be compared with each other under identical conditions: 1 m length, 1 mm2 cross section, and 20 degC temperature are the conditions for comparing the resistivity of wires. Conductance Conductance Increasing the cross section of a conductor reduces its resistance, i.e., it conducts the electron stream better. A low resistance R corresponds to a high conductance G, which is obtained as the reciprocal of the resistance. The unit of measurement for conductance is the siemens.
Material Resistivity r  Silver 0.0164 61 0.0038 Copper 0.01724 58 0.00393 Aluminum 0.0278 36 0.00403 Iron 0.13 7.7 0.0065 Constantan 0.5 2.0 + 0.00001
Temperature coefficient of resistors Temperature coefficient of resistors The resistivity r is specified in each case for a temperature or 20 degC. Most materials change their resistance when their temperature is altered.
When metals are heated, the atomic union becomes slightly unsettled by the energy supply. This restricts the mobility of the conduction electrons. The resistance of most metals increases as the temperature rises. Up to a temperature of around 200 degC the resistance change is proportional to the temperature change. In most liquids, gases, and semiconductors the resistance decreases as temperature increases.
The resistance change DR per degree temperature change is denoted by the temperature coefficient a. The unit of measurement for temperature differences between two temperature points is degC or K  on the celsius or the kelvin scale. Percentages for the temperature coefficient in many cases make it easier to assess the resistance change as a function of the temperature change.
of thermistors. Materials with a positive temperature coefficient conduct better at low temperatures and are therefore called PTC  thermistors.
As well as the ambient temperature, the current intensity can also influence the resistance of a material. "Electric friction" between moving charge carriers and kernels creates in the current carrying material heat and with it a temperature increase, which increases or decreases the resistance depending on the type of material. While the resistance of pure metals decreases with decreasing temperature, the resistance of semiconductors increases. In the area surrounding absolute zero  and semiconductor materials achieve a infinitely high resistance. In complicated devices temperatures in the vicinity of absolute zero have already been obtained.
Temperature coefficient of measuring Temperature coefficient of measuring resistors resistors The resistance of measuring resistors are only permitted to change very slightly in response to temperature fluctuations. The change has an affect on the electrical properties of measuring devices which would be influenced by temperature. Very small temperature coefficients for resistor materials are obtained by alloying certain metals, e.g., copper, nickel, and manganese. The temperature coefficient is, depending on the content of alloying constituents, between 0.001 and 0.005 % per K.
Temperature coefficient of semiconductors: Temperature coefficient of semiconductors Virtually all semiconductor materials exhibit a negative temperature coefficient. This ranges between 2 and 5 % per K for germanium and silicon.
Capacitance Capacitance The possibility of storing electrical energy in an electric field with a capacitor is utilized in varied ways in electric and electronic circuits. A measure of the capacity to absorb electric charges is the capacitance C; this has the unit "farad" .
The electric constant e0 specifies the permittivity of free space ; it has the constant value e0 8.85 As/Vm.
The dielectric coefficient er specifies the factor by which the capacitance increases for a certain dielectric in relation to vacuum. It is material specific and has the unit 1. The dielectric constant e is obtained as the product of these two quantities.
Coil: Design Design A current carrying conductor generates a magnetic field whose magnetic field lines are arranged concentrically around the conductor .
In a coil a wire is wound on a coil core in such a way as to produce many parallel conductor loops. As a result, the magnetic field caused by a current is amplified .
Conductors, nonconductors, semiconductors The fact that the resistance value R increases as the length increases and the cross section decreases is common to all materials. The following may be imagined: Aside from the electric charge carriers for the most part a large number of atoms for a specific volume. The number of effective charge carriers per unit of volume and their mobility between the kernels of the atomic union determine the resistivity r of a material.
Copper is the preferred choice of conductor due to its low resistivity. Aluminum, nickel, platinum, gold, tantalum, tungsten, silver, mercury, and tin are often used as well. In certain electric motors brushes made of carbonaceous materials are required and in simple microphones sound pressure changes are converted into resistance changes with the aid of carbon granules. A voltage drop is frequently desirable in electrical engineering and in electronics; the resistor materials are used here to reduce the current intensity. The corresponding components are pooled together under the generic term "resistors". These resistors are depending on the requirements made of certain metals, carbon or metal alloys.
Nonconductors: In nonconductors the valence electrons are bound by strong forces within the atomic structure and only very few free charge carriers are available, resulting in high resistivity. These bonds can however be broken by high voltages or by strong heating. Nonconductors are called insulators; these include for example porcelain, glass, rubber, plastics, Teflon, and PVC.
A distinction is made between conductors and nonconductors, depending on the number of effective electric charge carriers. Semiconductors There are materials whose conductivity cannot be classified with either conductors or nonconductors. They are, like the components made from them, called semiconductors. These semiconductors are in their very pure state good insulators. The conductivity can be greatly altered by specific measures, e.g., by targeted contamination or temperature increase. The properties of semiconductor materials are used in a variety of applications in diodes and transistors.
Ohm's law contains the quantities current intensity I, voltage U, and resistance R. One quantity can be calculated when the other two are known. Ohm's law is one of the important basic principles of an electronics engineer.
Kirchhoff's laws 1st Kirchhoff law: 1st Kirchhoff law: current law current law The sum of currents is equal to the sum of currents flowing out of that junction.
Connections of resistors: Series connection of resistors Series connection of resistors The series connection of resistors entails the connection of a number of resistors in succession .
In contrast to current measurements, it is not necessary in the case of voltage measurements to break the circuit. For this reason the preferred option for troubleshooting or testing where possible is voltage measurement.
The same voltage is effective at each single resistor of a parallel connection. When different resistors are connected in parallel, different single currents also result. According to Ohm's law the current intensity is greatest in the smallest resistor. Conversely, the smallest current flows in the largest resistor. The currents are inversely proportional to the resistors.
charged. The capacitor voltage rises over time from zero at the outset to approaching the applied direct voltage. A charging current flows which conversely assumes a peak value at the start and then decreases to zero.
When a charged capacitor is connected to a resistance, it constitutes a voltage source in this circuit; the charges balance themselves out, a drawable discharging current flows, and the capacitor is discharged.
In the alternating current circuit a voltage whose direction changes periodically acts on the capacitor. Charging and discharging therefore alternate likewise in periodic sequence this consideration should be confined to sinusoidal alternating voltage. The capacitor is charged during the positive half wave and discharged again via the internal resistance of the voltage generator when the voltage has exceeded its peak value. The current direction is reversed in the process.
current and voltage do not take effect at the same time, in contrast to ohmic resistance there is no thermal output in the capacitor. The capacitor's AC resistance is called capacitive reactance XC.
For an ideal capacitor the phase displacement angle ph between voltage and current is 90deg. Because of the finite dielectric resistance, occurring surface currents and dielectric losses through polarity reversal in the case of alternating voltage, this angle is however not quite 90deg for the real capacitor. This deviation is described by the loss factor or a reciprocal value, the capacitor Q factor. A capacitor separated from its voltage source will discharge slowly via its dielectric.
in A, R Charging or discharging resistance, U Capacitor voltage, t Time after start of switch on/off, t  Time constant in s.
Coil in the alternating current circuit Inductive reactance Inductive reactance The coil current cannot follow rapid voltage changes because the inductance has a current delaying effect. When the direct voltage is switched on, no current flows in the first moment. In the switch off moment the voltage U reverts sharply to the value zero while the current intensity only decays with a delay. The coil current lags behind the voltage.
In the case of sinusoidal alternating voltage the inductance causes a time difference between identical phases of current and voltage. The current reaches for example the positive crest value in each case 1/4 period later than the voltage; the crest values of the coil voltage UL include in each case the current intensity zero. The phase displacement between current and voltage is 90deg if the coil losses . The curve shape of the two quantities remains unchanged here.
In coils the current delayed by the inductance cannot reach its full value because the crest values of the sinusoidal alternating voltage in contrast to direct voltage only occur as instantaneous values. The current intensity therefore complies with the applied alternating voltage and with the self induction voltage generated in the coil. This influence of the inductance is summarized in the inductive reactance XL. High frequencies result in rapid field changes in the coil and thus high self induction voltages. The inductive reactance is therefore proportional to the inductance L and the frequency f.
The factor 2 p takes into account, as with : the capacitive reactance, the time sinusoidal characteristic of current and voltage. Because current intensity and voltage are effective at different times and in different directions, no heat is obtained in the loss free coil. This fact explains the designation "reactance".
 Plate capacitor.
__ 2 E D is the electrical energy density. When multiplied by the volume, it produces the electrical energy We.
Magnetic field Features Moving charges are associated with a magnetic field, i.e., electric current generates a magnetic field in the space surrounding it. Its manifestations match the manifestations of natural magnetic fields, e.g., the field of a permanent magnet or the Earth's magnetic field. In the same way as for electric fields, field lines were introduced to facilitate the depiction of magnetic fields in the case of positive currents and the direction of the magnetic field strength form a right handed screw. Whereas, however, in an electric field the electric field lines start out radially from the positively charged electrode and end at the negatively charged electrode, the magnetic field lines are always self contained, i.e., they exhibit neither a start nor an end. Another significant difference between an electric field and a magnetic field is that a magnetic field always has a pole character. Therefore it is not possible to realize a separate north or south pole. The field lines are always directed from the north to the south pole of the magnetic field and never touch.
Magnetic field quantities A series of magnetic field quantities is required to calculate magnetic circuits. Ampere turns Ampere turns In practice the magnetic fields of conductor loops and particularly of coils, which can be considered as the series connection of many conductor loops, are significant. These coils are as important as components in electrical engineering and electronics as resistors and capacitors. The connection between the current and the number of coil turns as the cause of the generated magnetic field is registered by the current linkage Th .
and the associated magnetic lines of force a) Single current carrying conductor with magnetic field, b) Parallel conductors, current flow in the same direction .
Th = N I , : Th Ampere turns in A , N Number of turns on coil, I Current in A.
Magnetic flux and flux density Magnetic flux and flux density The magnetic flux Ph is the measure of the sum total of magnetic field lines . Another important field quantity is the flux density or magnetic induction B.
Magnetism and magnetic field Magnets refer to bodies with the property of exerting a force on certain materials, e.g., iron, in its environment; a magnet attracts iron. This magnetic effect is intensified at the two ends of the magnet poles.
The ampere turns Th constitutes a measure of the magnetic effect of a current carrying coil. Here the ampere turns is all the greater the higher the current I and the number of turns N on the coil.
pure numerical factor specifies by how much the magnetic flux density is increased by a specific material in the coil cavity as against vacuum.
With the magnetic field strength H in A/m and u0 in Vs/Am the unit Vs/m2 is obtained for the magnetic flux density B and is denoted by tesla .
Forces on current carrying conductors in the magnetic field Magnetic fields exert forces on each other. Unlike poles attract, like poles repel. These effects can be substantiated with permanent magnets .
In all cases the level of the generated induction voltage depends on the extent to which the strength of the magnetic field  and the rapidity with which the strength of the magnetic field changes.
Classification of materials: Classification of materials Materials are divided into three groups according to their relative permeability values. Diamagnetic materials ur is independent of magnetic field strength and smaller than 1; the values are within the range: .
ur is a function of H and exhibits hysteresis; the values for ur are within the range 102 < ur < 5 105 .
sity and polarization drop to zero only on application of an opposing field whose field strength is HcB or HcJ; this field strength is called the coercive field strength.
As the field strength of the opposing field is further increased, saturation polarization is reached in the opposite direction. If the field strength is again reduced and the field reversed, curve , is traversed.
heat per volume during one remagnetizing cycle, corresponds to the area of the B H hysteresis loop; significant only for soft magnetic materials).
1 1 2 2 3 3 B H curve J H curve 500 500 500 Br 500 J mT B mT max HcB HcJ HG H kA/m UAE0269 1E
Ferromagnetic materials: Ferromagnetic materials Ferromagnetic materials are divided into soft and permanent magnetic materials. What must be emphasized is the immense range of eight powers of ten covered by the coercive field strength.
Permanent magnet materials Permanent magnet materials have high coercive field strengths; the values lie within the range HcJ > 1 kA ___ m  Thus high demagnetizing fields H may occur without the material losing its magnetic polarization. The magnetic state and operating range of a permanent magnet lie within the second quadrant of the hysteresis loop, on the demagnetization curve. In practice, the operating point of a permanent magnet never coincides with the remanence point, because magnetic polarization of the permanent magnet in its interior always causes a magnetic field, the demagnetizing field, which shifts the operating point into the second quadrant. The point on the demagnetization curve at which the product B H reaches its maximum value max is a measure of the maximum attainable air gap energy. In addition to remanence and coercive field strength, this value is important for characterizing permanent magnets.
AlNiCo, ferrite, FeNdB curves.
0 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 mT Flux density B 1 2 3 5 4 9 8 6 7 Field strength H UAE0271 1E
1 Pure iron, 2 78 NiFe , 7 Structural steel, 8 Cast iron, 9 Powder Fe core. UAE0270 1E
Electromagnetic fields: Electrical engineering deals with electromagnetic fields and their effects. These fields are associated with electric charges . Physics does not indicate whether the fields are the cause or the effect. Static charges produce an electric field, whereas moving charges give rise to a magnetic field as well. The association of electric and magnetic fields with static and moving charges is described by Maxwell's equations .
Power in the alternating : current circuit Features Resistors, capacitors, and coils are important components in electrical engineering and electronics. Especially in electronic circuits they can be found in the most varied combinations and circuit variants. But also many electrical devices exhibit as consumers behavior that can be emulated with an equivalent circuit of resistors, capacitors, and coils.
The behavior of these components and their interaction are of significance particularly in the case of operation on sinusoidal alternating voltage. If an ohmic resistance is connected to a sinusoidal voltage, current and voltage are constantly in phase. For a capacitor the current leads the voltage by 90deg, while for a coil the current lags behind the voltage by 90deg.
The occurring phase displacements can be depicted in both line and phasor diagrams. However, the phase diagrams for voltages, currents, resistances, and power are particularly important to describing the interaction of active resistances and reactances. In this connection a right angled triangle appears in each phasor diagram so that mathematical relationships can be derived using Pythagoras' theorem. But the trigonometric functions sine, cosine, and tangent can also be used to describe the mathematical relationships in phasor diagrams and thus in alternating current circuits.
There are three different types of power in an alternating current circuit: Active power P in watts, apparent power S in va .
Capacitor and coil are taken as ideal, resulting in phase quadrature of current and voltage. a) Current, voltage, and power diagram for capacitive reactive power, b) Current, voltage, and power diagram for inductive reactive power. DAE11411E
Reactive power Owing to the phase displacement between voltage and current u and i do not always have the same preceding sign . For the power an area is obtained which is situated precisely halfway each in the positive and negative regions. "Positive" power is the power drawn by the consumer from the voltage source.
Apparent power An apparent power S is created when effective resistances are interconnected. Multiplying for such a circuit the measured voltage U by the measured current I produces the apparent power S.
S Apparent power in VA, P Active power in W, Q Reactive power in var, U Voltage , cos ph Power factor, sin ph Reactive power factor.
their systems. If this value is undershot, the phase angle is reduced by individual or group compensation. By connecting an appropriate capacitor in parallel, it is possible to free the incoming cable in part or in whole of reactive current. In this way, the reactive currents or reactive power in the incoming cable cancel each other out and these can be output with active current or active power.
Wave propagation: Waveguide At higher frequencies forward and return conductors of an electric connection section are combined and called a waveguide or in short a line. Common structures are the parallel wire line, the twisted two wire line , the coaxial line, the strip line, and the microstrip line.
At higher frequencies the current is no longer distributed evenly over the line cross section. In the individual wire the current is increasingly displaced to the edge as the frequency increases . In particular the ohmic loss resistance and thus the damping of the line are thereby increased.
and the reflectance factor r is zero. In this case, no power is reflected, the full power being passed on to the terminating resistor R.
If a line is supplied at one end only with a sinusoidal time function, while terminated at the other end with a resistor, it is possible to calculate the standing wave ratio from the reflectance factor.
Couplers and matching transformers Couplers are used in conjunction with matching transformers to forward an electromagnetic wave from one waveguide to another. Matching transformers reduce the reflectance factor during the transition from one characteristic impedance to another or couple a symmetrical waveguide .
For some applications in motor vehicles the receiver is situated so near to the transmitter that near field conditions prevail.  Radio remote controls, for example, generate via a current carrying coil magnetic fields whose field strength in the near field is inversely proportional to the cube of the distance from the transmitter.
Antennas A coupler from a waveguide to free space is called an antenna. Antennas too are usually reciprocal; they can therefore act equally as transmitting and receiving antennas.
An electromagnetic wave in free space consists of time variant electric and magnetic fields. These have one spatial direction far away from transmitting antennas the field directions of these two fields are vertical to the direction of propagation of the wave. The direction of the corresponding electric field determines the polarization direction of the electromagnetic wave. Most antennas are designed in such a way that they can transmit and receive only one  single direction of the electric field strength. They therefore transmit only linearly polarized waves and receive only one particular  polarization of the wave.
. The optimum length becomes shorter for thicker rods, or if necessary also through connection with additional capacitances. In conjunction with an extended metal surface the dipole length is shortened by half to one l/4 dipole.
An example of a wide band antenna is : the logarithmically periodic antenna. Here, several half wave dipoles are of different lengths are arranged along a twin line. No antenna transmits in transmitting mode uniformly in all directions. Likewise, no antenna receives in receiving mode all  directions equally well. This directionality is described by the directional diagram . Figure 28 shows the directional diagram of a half wave dipole in a vertical section through the dipole antenna. What is depicted is the radiated power density against the angle.
The antenna factor indicates what voltage amplitude U of the electric field of the emitted wave.
____ l2RL  ) G where RL Input resistance of measuring device and of antenna input .
suring points. This changes when different : materials are used . The actual thermocouple consists in Figure 21 of two conductors made of materials 1 and 2. Since the connections are in some cases too short, they are extended at a coupling point. This coupling point at the temperature TK. If necessary, a further extension is required this is depicted in Figure 29 with material 3. This can involve, for example, conductor tracks of copper. Finally, the thermoelectromotive force UT can be tapped. The electronic circuit here is at the ambient temperature TU.
The advantage of thermocouples is their small size, enabling them to be used in areas with very small dimensions for example, thermocouples can be stuck to the surface for flow measurements in a wind tunnel. The thermoelectromotive forces are indeed very low; however, the internal resistance of the thermocouples is low such that disturbances have little bearing on the output signal. Thermocouples can be used to good effect up to temperatures in excess of 2,000 degC. On the down side, however, thermocouples are subject to low long term stability.
To utilize the Peltier effect, bismuth telluride  is 0.12 V so that a Peltier element with 127 thermocouples requires a supply voltage of approximately 15 V.
ing, which counteracts the cooling capacity. Consequently, determining the operating point with maximum efficiency is governed by the following: The ratio between current intensity and maximum current intensity must be chosen in the same way as that between the temperature difference and the maximum achievable temperature difference.
1 Conductor with material 1, 2 Conductor with material 2, 3 Conductor extension with material 3, TM Temperature at the measuring point, TK Temperature at the coupling point, TU Ambient temperature, UT Thermoelectromotive force.
_____ d  , where RH Hall constant .
In the case of Hall effect sensors made of doped materials such as silicon i.e., nor p type silicon the majorities determine the sign and the direction of the Hall voltage UH.
The Hall constant RH is relevant to use: Highest values in the range of 10 4 m3/A s are achieved for indium arsenide and geometry influences.
Hall effect sensors are frequently used for rotational speed recording, in which the alternation of tooth and gap of a rotating soft magnetic sensor wheel is detected. Other applications in automobiles include the detection of end points or the potential free measurement of electric currents via the magnetic field generated by the current.
Magnetoresistive effects Anisotropic magnetoresistive effect Anisotropic magnetoresistive effect Sensors based on the anisotropic magnetoresistive effect .
AMR sensor elements essentially consist of a thin strip roughly only 20 to 50 nm thick of highly permeable permalloy rotates M out of this position, which results in a relative change of the electrical resistance R by max. 3 %.
B Flux density, I  Supply current, U Supply voltage, IH Hall current, UH Hall voltage, d  Thickness of conductor.
or the frequently used barber pole structure in Figure 33. Here the current density vector J is rotated through approximately 45deg to obtain a linear characteristic curve for small magnetic fields Hy.
l Length of sensor element, b Width of sensor element, H Magnetic field, M Magnetization, J Current density, R Resistance, ThJM Angle between J and M.
m 1000 2000 2 1 RII R a 4 3 b Hy / HK RII Rmax RII R 0 1.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 x axis ThJM 1 2 M J Hy l b
as a rule effected by an additional constant magnetic field in the "easy direction" , but which reduces the sensitivity and also the absolute resistance and hence also the absolute resistance change since the maximum relative change of R is always approximately 3 %. Rotating the domains around an axis results in a change of the characteristic curve during linearization with a constant magnetic field Hy0.
The use of AMR sensors is favored by the higher magnetic field sensitivity obtained than with silicon Hall effect sensors. On the down side, AMR sensors are not compatible with semiconductor processes and must therefore be designed separately. Because of the mirror symmetric characteristic curve around zero AMR angle sensors can only resolve an angular range of 180deg.
AMR elements with barber pole structure; because of the opposing orientation of the highly conductive strips in two AMR elements respectively a piecewise linear characteristic curve is achieved, as can be seen by reference to Figure 35b.
acteristic curve with barber pole structure 1 Characteristic curve 1:  Easy axis in negative x direction, 2 Characteristic curve 2. 1:  Easy axis in positive x direction.
Giant magnetoresistive effect: Giant magnetoresistive effect In the case of the giant magnetoresistive effect the maximum value Rmax is the result. Relative resistance changes of approximately 6 % are obtained when a number of layer sequences are used.
The important aspect here is the minimal thickness of the electrically conductive and non magnetic intermediate layer , which is in the region of below one nanometer.
1 Soft magnetic layer,  rotatable magnetization M1, 2 "Spacer", metallic non magnetic  individual layer, 3 Ferromagnetic layer, fixed magnetization M2, 4 Antiferromagnetic coupling layer.
curs with higher magnetic fields Hy. The : maximum relative change of R for GMR spin valve sensors is in the range of approximately 4%.
requirement, i.e., more signal per surface area. Furthermore, a higher resolution can be achieved on account of the smaller GMR sensor elements. All this permits the use of smaller magnets for angle sensors and smaller gear wheels for example for rpm sensors.
In addition, angle sensors with a measurement range of 360deg are possible with GMR sensors, while only 180deg can be achieved with AMR sensors. The reason for this is that with GMR sensors the orientation of the pinned magnetization can be arranged differently for the individual GMR sensor elements.
Tunnel magnetoresistive effect Tunnel magnetoresistive effect In the case of the tunnel magnetoresistive effect , but instead flows due to the tunnel effect, perpendicularly to the electrically insulating and non magnetic intermediate layer. As with the AMR and GMR effects, only applied magnetic fields in the layer plane are relevant with regard to the TMR effect.
Basic principles of : semiconductor technology Electric conductivity in solid bodies An individual material's capacity for conducting electricity is determined by the number and mobility of the free charge carriers which it contains. The disparities in the electric conductivities displayed by various solid bodies at room temperature extend through a range defined by 10 to the 24th power. Accordingly, materials are divided into three electrical groups. Conductors is high. In good conductors, this amount to approx. 106 S/cm.
Non conductors is practically zero. Accordingly, the electric conductivity is negligible. The conductivity of good insulators is approximately 10 18 S/cm.
Doping of semiconductors Doping, i.e. the controlled addition of electrically active foreign substances to the base material, makes it possible to define and localize the semiconductor's conductivity. This procedure forms the basis of semiconductor devices. The producible and also adjustable electric conductivity of silicon that can be reproduced by doping is 104 to 10 2 S/cm.
ing the bond with the contiguous atoms. In : this ideal state, silicon has no free charge carriers; thus it is not conductive. The situation changes dramatically with the addition of appropriate additives and the application of energy.
Doping will be explained here by reference to a clear model presentation. However, it is important to bear in mind that not all effects can be explained by reference to this model .
n Doping Doping As only four electrons are required for bonding in a silicon lattice .
p Doping Doping The introduction of foreign atoms with three outer electrons . The silicon is transformed into a p conductor and is called a p type silicon.
Intrinsic conduction Intrinsic conduction Heat and light also generate free mobile charge carriers in undoped silicon; the resulting electron hole pairs produce intrinsic conductivity in the semiconductor material. This conductivity is generally modest in comparison with that achieved by doping. Increases in temperature induce an exponential rise in the number of electron hole pairs, ultimately obviating the electrical differences between the p and n regions produced by doping. This phenomenon defines the maximum operating temperature to which semiconductor devices may be subjected: This is for germanium 90 to 100 degC, for silicon 150 to 200 degC, and for gallium arsenide 300 to 350 degC.
A small number of opposite polarity charge carriers is always present in both n type and p type semiconductors. These minority charges exert a considerable influence on the operating characteristics of virtually all semiconductor devices.
pn junction in the semiconductor The area of transition between a p type zone and an n type zone within the same semiconductor crystal is referred to as the pn junction. The properties of this area exercise a major influence on the operating properties of most semiconductor devices. pn pn junction without external voltage junction without external voltage The p type zone has numerous holes, and the n type zone has only very few; there is a very large number of electrons in the n type zone, while in the p type zone there is an extremely small number. Each type of mobile charge carrier tends to move across the concentration gradient, diffusing into the other zone .
The diffusion of holes into the n type zone gives the p type zone in the pn junction area a negative charge, since the negatively charged core atoms . This potential opposes the respective migration tendencies of the charge carriers. This ultimately brings the exchange of holes and electrons to a halt. The potential current UD created on account of diffusion cannot be directly measured from the outside and in silicon is typically just 0.6 V.
A poorly conducting zone deficient in : mobile charge carriers is thus produced at the pn junction: This zone is called the space charge region or depletion layer. This zone has an electric field whose strength is also dependent on the externally applied voltage.
pn pn junction with external voltage junction with external voltage Now the conditions at a diode will be explained because a pn junction corresponds to the structure of a diode; here the anode is situated at the p doped silicon, while the cathode is situated at the n doped zone.
follows: Electrons which reach the spacecharge region are greatly accelerated on account of the high field strength. In this way, they can for their part generate free charge carriers as a result of impacts; this is also known as collision ionization. This brings about a dramatic rise in current and results in avalanche breakdown. In addition to avalanche breakdown, there is also Zener breakdown, which is based on the tunnel effect. The breakdown of a pn junction can destroy it and for this reason is often not wanted. In many cases, however, breakdown is wanted. Avalanche breakdown and Zener breakdown only occur when the diode is operated in the reverse direction.
the pn junction, resulting in a large flow of current in the forward direction , as the space charge region no longer has a significant resistance. Only the bulk resistance, i.e. the ohmic resistance of the doped layers, is effective. The current I increases exponentially as a function of U. It is, however, important to be aware of "thermal breakdown", at which point the semiconductor can be destroyed on account of the high level of heat. This can occur, for example, if the diode is operated in the forward direction with an unacceptably high current.
Discrete : semiconductor devices The properties of the pn junction and the combination of several pn junctions in a single semiconductor crystal chip provide the basis for a steadily increasing array of inexpensive, reliable, rugged, compact semiconductor devices. A single pn junction forms a diode, two pn junctions are used for transistors. The planar technique makes it possible to combine numerous operating elements on a single chip to form the important component group known as integrated semiconductor circuits. Semiconductor chips measure no more than several square millimeters and are usually installed in standardized housings .
Diodes A diode is a semiconductor device incorporating a single pn junction. Its specific properties are determined by the distribution pattern of the dopant in the crystal. Diodes which conduct currents in excess of 1 A in the forward direction are frequently referred to as power diodes.
Rectifier diode Rectifier diode The rectifier diode acts as a form of current valve; it is, therefore, ideally suited to rectifying alternating current. The forward current can be approximately 107 times higher than the current in the reverse direction . As the temperature rises, the power of this current increases significantly.
Diodes can also be used as polarity reversal protection diodes in order to prevent a current flow in the event of an incorrect voltage connection. It is also customary to use them as free wheeling diodes.
Rectifier diode for high reverse voltage Rectifier diode for high reverse voltage In the case of a rectifier, the voltage drops over the space charge region. Because this region is generally only a few micrometers in size, the high reverse currents produce a high electric field strength and the free electrons can accelerate greatly. Accelerated electrons can cause the semiconductor to be destroyed . To prevent this, it has proved useful to integrate an intrinsic layer between the pand n layers because this layer only contains few free electrons and thereby reduces the danger of a breakdown.
Switching diode Switching diode A switching diode is generally employed for rapid switching between high and low impedances. More rapid switching response can be achieved by diffusing gold into the material; this promotes the recombination of electrons and holes. During switching the space charge region must be recharged accordingly; during switching on from the blocking to the conducting state the initially charge free space charge region is filled with charges, which results in the forward recovery time. Accordingly, when the diode passes into the blocking state the is therefore critical when rapid switching is required. The storage charge or the maximum reverse current is often also specified here.
A distinction is made in the losses between forward power losses and switching power losses; at lower frequencies up to a few 100 Hz the forward power losses dominate while at higher frequencies the switching power losses increasingly play role.
Power diodes Power diodes When compared with switching diodes, power diodes are designed for higher currents voltage
can be achieved without the dopings hav : ing to be reduced in the p and n regions. Aside from pure silicon diodes, Schottky diodes based on silicon carbide .
Free wheeling diodes Free wheeling diodes High voltages can occur during the rapid switching of currents by inductance since the induced voltage is proportional to dI/ dt. Frequently free wheeling, or flyback, diodes are used to prevent damage to components such as power transistors . In this case the current flow is not abruptly interrupted, but can continue to flow via the free wheeling diodes so that high induced voltages are avoided.
Zener diode Zener diode A Zener diode is a semiconductor diode which, once a specific initial level of reverse voltage is reached, responds to further increases of reverse voltage with a sharp rise in current flow. This phenomenon is a result of a Zener and/or avalanche breakdown. Zener diodes are designed for continuous operation in this breakdown range. These are frequently used to provide a constant voltage or reference voltage.
Variable capacitance diode . Because of the rapid switching and the comparably low losses, Schottky diodes are used in high frequency circuits down into the microwave range.
Solar cell Solar cell The photovoltaic effect is applied to convert light energy directly into electrical energy. Solar cells, consisting largely of semiconductor materials, are the basic elements of photovoltaic technology. Exposure to light can cause the formation of free charge carriers  ranging from 0.5 to 1.2 V is generated between the contacts. This occurs only when the light quanta have at least the energy required to create an electron hole pair; the energy is proportional to the frequency and inversely proportional to the wavelength of the light. The theoretical efficiency of crystalline silicon solar cells is approximately 30 %.
Photodiode Photodiode The photovoltaic effect is utilized in a photodiode. The pn junction is operated in the reverse direction. Incident light creates additional free electrons and holes. These increase the reverse current recombine during operation in forward direction. The amount of energy
Depending on the choice of semiconductor and its doping, the LED emits in a limited spectral range. Frequently used semiconductor materials are: gallium arsenide .
OLED OLED OLED stands for "Organic Light Emitting Diode". An OLED is a very thin, two dimensional light source which emits soft and for the most part non dazzling light sharp cast shadows do not occur. OLEDs are in a good approximation Lambertian emitters, i.e. they always appear with uniform brightness regardless of the viewing angle. The small geometric dimensions are also to be noted; thus, OLEDs are less than 2 mm thick including glass substrate and encapsulation. A further particularity is the flexibility of the extremely flat design, which creates further possible applications in addition to the light properties with high color rendering.
OLEDs as non dazzling large area emitters with a broad spectrum are particularly suitable for interior applications in automobiles. Constant current operation suggests itself as the form of activation, enabling light changes on account of aging, temperature or even by production tolerances to be minimized. OLEDs can be dimmed for example by pulse width modulation.
During the manufacture of OLEDs a number of thin organic semiconductor layers are placed in succession on the conductive substrate ; these layers can form polymeric substances or "small molecule materials" as an amorphous layer.
Further conductive and transparent electrodes, which cover the organic layers on both sides, are then used. Oxides such as indium tin oxide .
Laser LED Laser LED New lighting systems increasingly use laser LEDs semiconductor based laser light sources. These are small spotlights with very high luminance can then be achieved with very small optical lenses. This makes possible small headlamps with high light output. The performance of a laser LED is decisively influenced by the properties of these luminescent materials and their optical properties. Hybrid light concepts are frequently used at present so that LEDs and laser LEDs are used for the driving lights and for the high beam lights respectively.
Bipolar transistors: Two contiguous pn junctions produce the transistor effect, a feature employed in the design of components used to amplify electrical signals and to assume switching duties. Bipolar transistors consist of three zones of varying conductivity, the configuration being either pnp or npn. The zones .
There are different transistor classifications, depending on the fields of application: small signal transistors are involved in the transistor effect.
The base collector junction is reverse biased; this is shown in Figure 4b as a diode between base B and collector C. This creates a space charge region at the pn junction between base and collector with a high electric field.
a b E IC IB IE UCE UBE B C IC IB IE UBE UCE B E C C E B p n n SAE1156 3Y
Assuming that IB on account of the current gain B is much smaller than IC, it then follows:  IE IC.
Darlington transistors are used when a voltage , the Darlington transistor is only suitable for relatively low frequencies this circuit is therefore not used in high frequency circuits. The main reason for this is the time required for the switching of T2 through the removal of the excess charges in the base of T2 via resistance R; if R is selected as too small, the total current amplification b is reduced.
Another drawback is the voltage at the : input of 1.2...1.4 V, which is twice as high compared with simple bipolar transistors. The forward voltage UCE2 at T2 increases by UBE2 to approximately 0.9 V .
Diode D3 is a free wheeling diode for inductive loads in order to avoid high voltages between the emitter and collector of T2.
IGBT IGBT The insulated gate bipolar transistor  is an important switching element in the middle power range for currents up to 3 kA and voltages up to 3 kV. The IGBT is characterized by relatively low switching power losses and high efficiency.
The IGBT combines the advantages of a MOSFET with low power, voltage controlled activation and of a power bipolar transistor T2 with a relatively low forward voltage at the output: In Figure 8 voltage UGE is used at the MOS transistor T1 to switch on the pnp bipolar transistor T2, which then directs the output current IC with relatively low forward voltage UCE; the saturation voltage UCESAT is in the range of 2...3 V.
Field effect transistors In a field effect transistor .
Operation of a junction FET: Operation of a junction FET The operation of a junction gate field effect transistor is explained by reference to the n channel type and the source terminal thus controls the current ID between the source and the drain.
Only charge carriers of one polarity are required for field effect transistor operation. The power necessary for controlling the current is virtually nil. Thus, the junction FET is a unipolar, voltage controlled component. Increasing UGS causes the space charge regions to extend further into the channels, thereby constricting the channel and thus the current path . If the voltage UGS at the gate is zero, the channel between the two p type zones is not constricted and the current ID from the drain to the source is at its maximum.
The transfer characteristic curve i.e. ID as a function of UGS then looks exactly the same as the characteristic curve of a self conducting n channel MOSFET as shown in Figure 11c.
Operation of an MOS transistor Operation of an MOS transistor The operation of an MOS transistor . This current consists exclusively of electrons. As the gate voltage acts through an insulating oxide layer, no stationary current flows through the gate; no power is required for the control function. It is required merely to activate and deactivate electrical power in order to recharge the gate capacity. In summary, the MOS transistor is a unipolar, voltage controlled component.
where K is the proportionality number .
BCD hybrid technology: BCD hybrid technology Integrated structures for power electronics applications are becoming increasingly important. Such structures are realized by combining bipolar and MOS components on a single silicon chip, thereby utilizing the advantages of both technologies. BCD hybrid technology is a significant manufacturing process in automotive electronics and also facilitates the manufacture of MOS power components . This technology is a combination of bipolar, CMOS and DMOS technologies .
Operational amplifiers Areas of application of operational Areas of application of operational amplifiers amplifiers The name "operational amplifier" ideal amplifier. Because of its properties, it was used particularly in analog computers to solve nonlinear differential equations, i.e. as a summator, integrator and differentiator. The rapid development of digital electronics saw analog computers being increasingly driven from the market with the result that today analog computers do not play a role at all.
By integrating them in microelectronic circuits, it is today possible to offer such operational amplifiers at a very economical price on the market so that many amplifier applications can be put into effect. To achieve the desired properties, operational amplifiers in their integrated form contain some , first the behavior of an ideal operational amplifier will be described and its use demonstrated. Then the real i.e. actual properties will be examined in more detail and its effect to be realized on the circuit analyzed.
AD is the open loop gain. The operational amplifier is connected to a positive supply voltage and to a negative supply voltage with regard to the frame potential. In the case of a unipolar supply, the negative supply voltage can be applied to the frame potential. The supply voltages are not usually indicated in many circuit diagrams. They are however very much needed in order to guarantee the energy supply to the operational amplifier.
PMOS and NMOS technology SAE1164Y UAE0461 2E PMOS transistor NMOS transistor Source Output Input Gate Drain Source p p n silicon n n p well UCC UE UP UD UA UN
As a rule, the VV operational amplifier is used; this will now be explained in more detail in the following. Because the circuit arrangement is of crucial importance to the function of an operational amplifier, this will be addressed in more detail first. The distinction between positive feedback and negative feedback is important here. Furthermore, an ideal operational amplifier will be assumed when deriving the correlations.
Circuit arrangement: negative and Circuit arrangement: negative and positive feedback positive feedback Negative feedback counteracts the cause. In the operational amplifier, a connection is required from the output to the inverting input for this purpose . This connection can be implemented by a network. The cause of a change in the output voltage UA is always a change in the differential voltage UD at the input; negative feedback therefore always acts in such a way that the voltage UD becomes small and ideally zero.
Positive feedback, in contrast to negative feedback, supports the cause of the change at the output. UA is thus amplified by positive feedback, i.e. UD increases as UA changes and is therefore always not equal to zero. In this way, the output voltage UA can assume only two stationary values, namely the maximum value or the minimum value.
It thus becomes clear that, in spite of a very high open loop gain AD on the part of the operational amplifier, with the aid of negative feedback a finite gain A can be set with the negative feedback network. This is explained below in greater detail using examples.
Ideal and real operational amplifier Ideal and real operational amplifier First, the properties of an ideal operational amplifier as shown in Figure 18 will be summarized. For further information, see .
This quantity describes the change in the output voltage UA if the two input voltages UP and UN change simultaneously , i.e. UD remains constant.
 approaches infinity, i.e. in the case of an equal and co phasal change in the voltages UP and UN, UA remains unchanged.
Basic circuits: Basic circuits The external circuit arrangement of an operational amplifier determines the behavior of the entire circuit. Here, negative feedback plays the dominant role, since it enables the gain to be set exactly through the choice of resistances. The function shall now be explained by reference to several examples.
The output voltage UA is here also directly dependent on the input voltage U1 and the choice of resistances R2 and R1; however, here the gain UA /U1 has at least the value one; UA and U1 are in phase.
U1 Input voltage, UD Differential voltage, UA Output voltage, R1, R2 Network resistances, IR1, IR2 Currents in R1 and R2, IN Input current.
U1 Input voltage, UD Differential voltage, UA Output voltage, R1, R2 Network resistances, IR1, IR2 Currents in R1 and R2, IN Input current.
available at the output of the operational amplifier as UA. This is important particularly for conditioning sensor signals, as here the sensor output voltage may not be loaded in many cases, i.e. any current flow from the sensor element can reduce the tappable voltage significantly.
In this way, the amplified difference be : tween the two voltages U1 and U2 is obtained as the potential difference UD between the two outputs of the two operational amplifiers. In order to output this voltage UD as an output voltage referred to ground UA, a subtracting amplifier can be connected in series , where UA1 instead of U1 and UA2 instead of U2 are supplied.
Important characteristic data Important characteristic data For many applications, the operational amplifiers must demonstrate properties which partly contradict each other. There are a large number of operational amplifiers, which are optimized for different fields of application. Basically, the data for specific operating points or operating ranges are specified.
These demands do not, however, cover all the requirements for use in motor vehicles; for example, even higher temperatures occur in the engine compartment or in brake systems.
among other things, from asymmetries in the internal circuit arrangement of the two inputs and is typically in the range of a few mV to a few mV.
However, as well as the value of the offset voltage UOS, the temperature effect and long term stability are also highly important. Some operational amplifiers offer the possibility of compensating the offset voltage by means of an external circuit arrangement provided this is not already effected by internal circuit engineering measures. It is important in this connection that the input voltage can also drift on account of the temperature effect; thus soldered junctions can represent thermocouples with a voltage of a magnitude of 10 to 100 uV/K.
UA Output voltage, UD Differential voltage between the inputs, UOS Offset voltage, UA, MAX Maximum output voltage, UA, MIN Minimum output voltage.
of an instrument amplifier U1, U2 Input voltages, IN1, IN2 Input currents, I Current R, R' Resistances UA1, UA2 Output voltages, in relation to ground.
Input resistances and currents: On account of the, as a rule, very low input currents IN and IP, very high input resistances, which are sometimes in the high megaohm range, are accordingly obtained. A distinction is made here between the common mode input resistance  and the differential input resistance between the two inputs.
The inputs of customary operational amplifiers form transistors; either bipolar transistors in which the base in each case is activated or MOS field effect transistors in which the gate is recharged. The small input currents are explained in this way. When bipolar transistors are used, these are base currents and are in the range of mA. When MOSFET are used, the corresponding gate currents are obtained which are required to recharge the associated gate capacity. The latter are proportional to the operating frequency and are usually in the range of pA.
The input bias current can cause an input voltage error in high resistance circuits. This can be compensated for by connecting identical impedances to the two inputs, as then in each case the same voltage drops and the differential voltage UD remains unaffected. Like the offset voltage, the input current can also drift over the temperature and the time. Output resistance The output of the operational amplifier can be described by a series connection of an ideal voltage source and a resistance; the latter is then the output resistance RA. This resistance limits the output current. In general, operational amplifiers can drive output currents of 20 mA; there are also types with an output current of up to 10 A. Slew rate The slew rate denotes the maximum possible change in the output voltage UA per period of time, i.e. the maximum value for dUA/dt. The values for the slew rate for conventional operational amplifiers are in the range of less than 1 V/ms to more than 1 V/ns.
Noise Noise can be described by specifying the noise voltage density or the noise current density. Usually the noise voltage density UR' is given in nV/ ___ Hz .
For an amplifier circuit, the total effective noise voltage density is obtained as the root of the sum of the squares of the effective values.
The noise is determined predominantly at the input of the operational amplifier. If JFET or MOSFET are used, low current but comparatively high voltage noise is obtained. The behavior is reversed in operational amplifiers which are based on bipolar transistors .
Push pull drivers: Push pull drivers Operational amplifiers usually exhibit a maximum output current of approximately 20 mA. If a larger current is needed for example to activate power components or actuators ; MOSFETs can also be used instead of bipolar transistors.
Because of the negative feedback the output voltage UOUT is always equal to UIN and consequently for an ohmic load the output current I load follows the input voltage UIN.
voltage are made available here for the activation of IGBTs. The driver output stage is as a rule supplied with a metallically separated voltage via an insulated DC/DC converter. In addition, the driver circuit takes on various protective functions such as overcurrent detection or even interlocking logic.
Monolithic integrated circuits: Monolithic integration In monolithic integrated circuits . This technology enables complex circuits to be housed in the smallest of spaces.
Planar technology is based on the oxidation of silicon wafers, which is a relatively simple process, and the speed at which the dopants penetrate into silicon, which is exponentially greater than the speed at which they enter the oxide. Doping only occurs at locations where openings are present in the oxide layer. The specific design requirements of an individual integrated circuit determine the precise geometric configuration, which is applied to the wafer in a photolithographic process. All processing procedures .
Planar technology makes it possible to manufacture all circuit components .
Because of the ever increasing component density , the third dimension, i.e. the plane vertical to the surface, is also increasingly being utilized in the design. In this way, particularly in the field of power electronics, advantages such as lower resistances, smaller losses and thus also higher current densities can be achieved.
several hundred function elements per chip and a mean chip surface area of 1 mm2. But the chip surface area can be very much larger in circuits with high power outputs .
with over 1 million function elements per chip , a surface area of up to 300 mm 2 and the smallest structure sizes of less than 30 nm.
Computer aided simulation and design methods are essential elements in the manufacture of integrated circuits. Entire function modules are used in VLSI and ULSI, otherwise the time expenditure and failure risk would make development impossible. In addition, simulation programs are used to detect any defects made.
The section of a permanent magnet motor is shown in Figure 1. The stator consists of the magnetic yoke and the permanent magnet. The rotor is formed by the rotor tooth surface Az, the rotor tooth, and the winding, which is permeated by the magnetic flux and causes a torque producing reluctance force at the tooth surface. The normal force Fn acting on the tooth surface counterbalances together with the normal force of the opposite tooth on the shaft.
Application examples for the first case are commutator machines and switched reluctance motors. Application examples for the second case are commutator machines with ironless rotors and commutator disk rotor machines.
rotor motor 1 Magnetic yoke, 2 Permanent magnet, 3 Rotor tooth surface AZ, 4 Rotor tooth, 5 Armature winding, 6 Magnetic flux F.
r Rotor radius, Ft Tangential force , Fn Normal force, M Torque, a Angle of rotation, d Air gap in the magnetic circuit.
Systematics of rotating : electric machines The energization of the windings of electric machines determines their properties. A distinction is made between self commutated motors.
The first group includes DC motors in which cyclic activation of the winding phases in the rotor is effected on a self regulated basis via the mechanical .
quantities are named in part by DIN EN 60027 4 . This standard gives names and letter symbols for quantities and units. A pole pair consists in each case of a north pole and a south pole. The magnetic flux that is set emerges from the north pole through the rotor via the air gap into the south pole.
Direct current machines: In direct current machines motor operation is frequently preferred to generator operation. These are used for example as drives for electric fuel pumps, fans, starters, windshield wipers, and power window units. Figure 3a shows a two pole motor and Figure 3b a four pole motor. In higher pole motors a number of shorter magnetic circuits are generated which facilitate greater utilization of the magnet volume. The motors consist of the magnetic yoke, the poles, copper segment, inlet brush, winding phase, and outlet brush, through which the armature current IA passes which in turn is split into the branch circuit currents IZ.
Direct current machines with excitation by electromagnets are classified according to their winding behavior. In a series wound motor the armature and excitation windings are connected in series. In a shuntwound motor the armature and excitation windings are connected in parallel. The terminal markings of direct current machines comply with DIN EN 60034 Part 8 .
IA N S 1 2 3 NZ NZ 5 4 6 IZ IZ N N S S NZ NZ S 5 4 IA IA IZ IZ IZ IZ 2 1 3 Ph IZ IA A 4 IA SAE1299 1Y SAE1298 1Y SAE1300 1Y
Commutation Only the commutator facilitates rotation of the armature and serves to reverse the direction of the current in a winding phase . Commutation is therefore the reversal of the current direction.
gram for motor and generator operation IA Armature current, UKl Terminal voltage, RA Armature resistance, L Armature inductance, UA Voltage drop via armature resistance RA, UL Induced voltage, EA Electric field strength along the winding wire, EL Field strength induced in the winding, l Wire length, Ad Wire cross sectional area, k Specific electric conductivity.
commutation a) Undisturbed stator field distribution, b) Undisturbed armature field distribution, c) Superposition of field distribution from  a and b, d) Reversal of current direction while maintaining the direction of armature rotation.
which allows the armature to rotate to the left. The current direction is reversed by a commutator in Figure 6d while maintaining the direction of armature rotation. The rotor from Figure 3a is shown enlarged in Figure 7. The armature current IA is split in each case into branch circuit currents IZ. The branch circuit currents flows into the winding phases of the north and south poles. Beneath the pole faces the current direction in the winding phases is therefore always the same. The current direction changes in each case only in the winding phase to be commutated. The commutation of a winding phase at the inlet brush is given as an example of a commutation. The coils to be commutated are in the neutral zone , which is marked by an arrow.
only slowly and reaches the current level  IZ only shortly before the time tCE. The cause of this is an excessively underdimensioned induced commutating pole voltage.
machine .
a) Main field: exciting current switched on, rotor current switched off, b) Armature quadrature axis field: exciting current switched off, rotor current switched on, c) Complete field: superposition of main and armature quadrature axis field;  magnetic neutral zone is deflected by angle b. 1 Exciter pole , PhRS Magnetic flux of the complete field. b a c N S R Ph S Ph RS Ph b 1 1 2 3 UAE1122 1Y UAE1120Y
The main field distortion that occurs in the area of the pole shoe leads to a reduction in the available pole surface, combined with an increase in the magnetic resistance. This is why larger machines are given a compensation winding that is integrated in the pole shoes . The compensation winding is connected in series with the rotor winding and its dimensions are such that it compensates for the rotor quadrature axis field.
and commutating winding a) Pole arrangement, b) Distribution of the excitation field BE Superposition of all field distributions. 1 Pole shoe, 2 Neutral zone.
UAE1123 3Y BE 2 2 a b d e f g h 1 1 1 x x x x x x x Ph c tp
___ RA  c1 __ c2  Ps  a change of the flux Ps and thus also a speed change. This measure is called field weakening.
The straight line slope of equation . Speed curves with the series resistance as the parameter can be seen in Figure 14b.
of armature series resistance a) Series connection of armature resistance and series resistance, b) Speed curves with the series resistance as parameter.
n3 n2 n1 nn n n0 SAE306 1Y SAE1305 1E In IAn MA MLe I n0 nn I IV Motor operation Generator operation 
___ c1 L  .
 as in a vacuum cleaner or in pumps. A small load change always brings about a large speed change. The speed setting options of the series wound machine are limited to changing the terminal voltage.
agram of the series wound machine with the terminal voltage UKl as the parameter. Asynchronous machine The asynchronous machine is the main drive used in industry. In the automotive sector, for example, it is used in electrical power assisted steering and in hybrid vehicles. The following section presents the operating concept of the asynchronous machine as an induction machine.
General setup A distinction is made between external rotor and internal rotor machines. In the case of the external rotor machine, the rotor encloses the stator; on the internal rotor machine, the stator encloses the rotor. The diagram of the principle . The stator consists of three coils with an iron core which are each assigned to a phase. The iron core consists of individual steel sheets insulated against one another to keep the eddy current losses to a minimum. The rotating stator magnetic field induces in the short circuited coil a current which for its part causes a magnetic field which is coupled to the rotating stator field and thus becomes effective in terms of torque.
of the series wound machine n Motor speed, nn Rated speed, UKl Terminal voltage, UN Rated voltage, MM Motor torque, MR friction torque, MN Rated torque.
conductor loop on rotating mounts. The relative movement between the rotating stator field and the rotor is described by the slip angular frequency oS.
rotor 1 Short circuit bridge, 2 Short circuit rod. iind Induced current, l Short circuit rod length, r Rotor radius, Anom Rod cross sectional area, BR Magnetic field rotating with slip angular frequency, AS Cross sectional area of conductor loop, k Specific electric conductivity of conductor loop, oS Slip angular frequency .
______ k Anom iind 2   Figure 19 shows torque curves as a function of the slip angular frequency.
Synchronous machine Synchronous machines are used preferably as claw pole generators. In motor operation, they are used for example in electrical power assisted steering, to drive hybrid vehicles, and in electrically driven turbochargers.
PhS Stator flux, PhR Rotor flux, PhRS Superpositioned flux, oPhS Angular velocity of the excitation field, Ier Exciting current in the rotor, AS Magnetically effective stator surface, AR Magnetically effective rotor surface, r Radius of the rotor, d Distance between rotor and stator, d Air gap length, a Deflection angle.
The factor 2 results from the fact that there : are two air gaps between the rotor and stator. If the motor provides torque, the rotor rotates with the angle a from its idle position .
seen here. The third term also generates a torque and is only dependent on the stator flux . Operation of the motor with only the third term corresponds to operation of a reluctance motor.
An increase in the outer load torque leads to an increase in the load angle a and thus to a change in motor torque MM to be delivered . The maximum motor torque to be delivered is referred to as the breakdown torque MK at the position aK. If aK is exceeded, the machine slips out.
_ > l  x  _ > B  )  Here, I is the current in the conductor, l the length of the conductor, and B the flux density of the effective magnetic field. Vectorial notation and the cross product mean that conductor and magnetic field must be perpendicular to each other in order to fashion a force.
 follows for a stationary operating state. Suppression of harmonics A sinusoidal flux distribution along the periphery of a stator is technically not feasible, therefore harmonics occur during operation in addition to the principal wave of the magnetic field. These lead to unwanted fluctuations of torque, vibrations, and additional losses. In order to specifically suppress the influence of certain magnetic field harmonics, the rotor or stator slots are often skewed in electric machines. The skewing is intended to ensure that the same face of north and south poles of the harmonic to be neutralized are enclosed by the turns of a coil. The magnetic fluxes of these poles thus counterbalance each other and no longer impact negatively on the machine's operating characteristics.
Another way of suppressing harmonics comes from the spatial distribution and chording of the coils. The effect of spatial distribution and chording is reflected in the winding factor. This is a measure of the coupling of windings with the respective magnetic flux density waves.
effective as induced voltage. If current is applied to the rotor, the mutual induction caused by the rotor also takes effect. The first case is referred to as underexcitation. The current lags behind the voltage by 90deg . The synchronous machine shows inductive characteristics.
ond operating case .
UP Pole wheel voltage, US Reactance voltage, U0 Terminal voltage, I1 Stator current. UP US U0 I1 a b U0 UP US UP I1 U0 c UAE1138Y
in between the voltages U0 and US is de : fined. For motor operation, the load angle b is < 0 . The voltage triangle is closed by the voltage US.
The synchronous reactance means that the current I1 leading by 90deg in relation to the voltage US flows. This is broken down into its components: the active current IW and reactive current IB .
comes negative. Current flows out of the machine. In the case of overexcitation, the machine behaves like a capacitor. It delivers reactive power .
If the pole wheel voltage is reduced so that the pointer of the reactance voltage US is vertically on the pointer of the terminal voltage, the generator only delivers active current .
A further reduction in the pole wheel voltage leads to a case of underexcitation. The machine behaves inductively. It consumes reactive power .
a) Overexcitation, b) Motor operation with consumption of active current, c) Underexcitation. U0 Terminal voltage, US Reactance voltage, UP Pole wheel voltage, I1 Current, IW Active current, IB Reactive current, b Load angle. UP U0 U0 US US IB IW IW I1 UP U0 US IB IW I1 a b c UP b b b a b c UP UP U0 US US US IB IW IW IB IW I1 I1 U0 U0 UP b b b UAE1139Y UAE1140Y
Starting synchronous motors: Synchronous motors then only generate a permanently positive torque when the rotor and rotating field speeds match. If this is not the case, the rotor's magnet poles are alternately attracted and repelled. The rotor starts to oscillate and also heats up strongly since the current consumption is not limited by the induced pole wheel voltage. In the worst case the insulation of the windings is destroyed by the thermal load. To stop this from happening, the machine rotor must first be accelerated to synchronous speed. Three procedures have proven successful in the past for this purpose.
Procedure 1 Procedure 1 The rotor is accelerated with the aid of a DC motor to synchronous speed before being put into operation.
Procedure 2 Procedure 2 In salient pole rotors a cage winding, also called a damper winding, can be integrated in the pole shoe. A structure of this type is pictured in Figure 27. This winding delivers in asynchronous mode the necessary torque to accelerate to synchronous speed. The windings are additionally short circuited and deliver a further small torque contribution during running up. If the machine is already at rotational speed, no further currents are induced on account of the absence of relative speed between rotor and stator speeds.
Procedure 3 Procedure 3 The rotating field speed is adapted with frequency converters to the rotor speed and slowly increased up to synchronous speed.
Switched reluctance motor Properties of the switched reluctance motor The "switched reluctance motor" of stator magnet teeth makes possible a rotary motion whereby the rotor teeth are brought into line with the stator teeth. Since rare earth materials do not have to be used, areas of application open up in which motors with permanent magnet material cannot be used. Areas of application at high temperatures are mentioned here by way of example.
The switched reluctance motor is suitable for variable speed drive tasks and for positioning tasks. Thanks to its design, it can generate a holding torque over an extended period of time. It also generates high torque fluctuations.
In the snapshot of Figure 28 the stator windings are energized .
motor as internal rotor 1 Rotor shaft, 2 Rotor tooth, 3 Stator, 4 Stator teeth, 5 Non energized stator winding, 6, 7, 8, 9 Energized stator windings, 10 Flux F, 11 Cooling channel.
Single phase equivalent circuit diagram of the switched reluctance motor The equivalent circuit diagram of the switched reluctance motor reduced to a phase a is depicted in Figure 29. The symbols and designations have been taken from VDI/VDE 3680 .
of the switched reluctance motor d Direct axis, q Quadrature axis,  a Strand th Ua ia SAE1309 1Y
______ th  , which is calculated with the angle dependent co energy. In the angle position th1 the rotor and stator teeth face each other in line. In this angle position the minimum reluctance and consequently the maximum interlinked flux Psmax are obtained. The torque equals zero in this position. A torque is obtained in the angle position th2. The stator tooth faces the rotor grove. The reluctance value assumes a maximum, the flux Ps a minimum.
The symbols and abbreviations used have been taken from VDI/VDE 3680 . Electronic motors In the case of electronically commutating motors .
The rotational speed of the electronic : motor is set by the frequency of the surrounding stator field. Sensors are required to pick up the rotor position. Widespread use is made of Hall sensors fitted in the working air gap to enable cyclic relaying between the winding phases with the help of activation electronics.
DC Q0 Q2 Q4 Q3 Q5 A C B Controlling system Power controller Rotor position Energy converter Closedloop control Start/ stop Direction of rotation/ speed Driver N S S N Measurement system UAE1142E Nominal efficiency en Rated power PN IE4 100 95 90 85 80 75 70 65 100 101 102 % 2 1 3 kW SAE1311 1E
Three phase current system : Technically relevant is the application of the three phase alternating current system as a three phase current system, the major feature of which is that the total of all voltages and currents is zero at all times.
ignated with U, V and W) and therefore the windings must be evenly distributed over the circumference. Figure 35 shows the arrangement of a three strand winding with one coil per pair of poles and strand The terminal markings of the phases comply with DIN EN 60034, Part 8 .
each of the strands in Figure 36b in flux direction. The arrangement forms a pair of poles. The associated magnetic fluxes emerge vertically in relation to the winding plane of the strands .
The flux PhRes resulting from the three strands as well as its direction are achieved by geometrically adding up the three individual fluxes PhU, PhV and PhW.
per strand a) Pole arrangements, b) Example of the internal wiring of the fourpole motor with two windings per pole pair and strand.
UAE1147 2E U1 U2 U4 V1 1 a b 2 U1 V1 W1 * *** ** * W3 W4 W2 U3 V4 V2 V3 W1 U4 V4 W4 Internal circuitry
________________________________ References References K. Fuest, P. Doring: Elektrische Maschinen und Antriebe, 6th Edition, Vieweg Verlag, 2008.
UAE1149 1E U1 1st strand 2nd strand 3rd strand V1 N B x S U2 W1 p/ t 3 p / t 3 2  1 2
out in order of increasing number of  protons i. e. increasing nuclear charge number and in order of their atomic mass. The atomic mass is essentially determined by the total number of nuclear constituents, i. e. the sum total of protons and neutrons. The total number of protons and neutrons is also called the mass number. The number of protons corresponds to the atomic number. The neutral element atoms always have as many protons and electrons.
Groups and periods Groups and periods The elements are divided in the periodic table into different groups . The nested structure of the groups is due to the fact that the electrons always occupy the lowest energy levels. The position of these energy levels, which are also called electron orbitals and indicate the probability of electrons being present around the atomic nucleus, can be derived using quantum mechanics.
Quantum numbers Quantum numbers The structure of the periodic table is based on four quantum numbers , with which the four electron orbitals with the designations s, p, d and f can be calculated. When the electrons are arranged into these orbitals in order of increasing energy, this creates groups of elements which demonstrate a similar manner of reaction across all the periods. This manner of reaction is only minimally influenced by the electrons on the inner orbitals. The crucial factors are the energy and number of outer electrons. The outer electrons are frequently referred to as "valence electrons".
Main groups Main groups The elements in groups Ia, IIa and IIIa... VIIIa are called main group elements. The main group elements include hydrogen and the alkali metals . The electrons of the main group elements of the 1st period, hydrogen and helium, are found exclusively in s orbitals. In the case of the other main group elements in the 2nd through 7th periods, the electrons also occupy p orbitals starting from the main group IIIa.
Secondary groups Secondary groups The elements of the secondary groups Ib, IIb and IIIb...VIIIb with electrons in  d orbitals all have a metallic character. The copper group is assigned to the secondary group Ib because its electron configuration shows similarities to the main group Ia. The elements in both groups tend to form salts from monovalent ions. The same applies to the groups IIa and IIb. Divalent metal compounds are formed in the group of alkaline earth metals and the zinc group IIb. The designations for the secondary groups IIIb...VIIb likewise have their roots in the electron configuration and provide an indication of the maximum valence of these metal ions.
The elements iron, cobalt and nickel as well as the elements underneath called higher homologs are brought together as secondary group VIIIb due to their marked chemical similarity.
Table 1: Periodic table of elements: la Vllla 1 H 1.008 lla llla lVa Va Vla Vlla 2 He 4.003 3 Li 6.941 4 Be 9.012 5 B 10.811 6 C 12.011 7 N 14.007 8 O 15.999 9 F 18.998 10 Ne 20.180 11 Na 22.990 12 Mg 24.305 lllb lVb Vb Vlb Vllb Vlllb lb llb 13 Al 26.982 14 Si 28.086 15 P 30.974 16 S 32.066 17 Cl 35.453 18 Ar 39.948 19 K 39.098 20 Ca 40.078 21 Sc 44.956 22 Ti 47.87 23 V 50.942 24 Cr 51.996 25 Mn 54.938 26 Fe 55.845 27 Co 58.933 28 Ni 58.693 29 Cu 63.546 30 Zn 65.39 31 Ga 69.723 32 Ge 72.61 33 As 74.922 34 Se 78.96 35 Br 79.904 36 Kr 83.80 37 Rb 85.468 38 Sr 87.62 39 Y 88.906 40 Zr 91.224 41 Nb 92.906 42 Mo 95.94 43 Tc of the stablest isotopes of radioactive elements.
Table 2: Designations of chemical elements: Element Symbol Atomic  number Actinium Aluminum Americium 1 Antimony Argon Arsenic Astatine Ac Al Am Sb Ar As At 89 13 95 51 18 33 85 Barium Berkelium 1 Beryllium Bismuth Bohrium 1 Boron Bromine Ba Bk Be Bi Bh B Br 56 97 4 83 107 5 35 Cadmium Carbon Cesium Calcium Californium 1 Cerium Chlorine Chromium Copernicium 1 Copper Cobalt Curium 1 Cd C Cs Ca Cf Ce Cl Cr Cn Cu Co Cm 48 6 55 20 98 58 17 24 112 29 27 96 Darmstadtium 1 Dubnium 1 Dysprosium Ds Db Dy 110 105 66 Einsteinium 1 Erbium Europium Es Er Eu 99 68 63 Fermium 1 Fluorine Flerovium 1 Francium Fm F Fl Fr 100 9 114 87 Gadolinium Gallium Germanium Gold Gd Ga Ge Au 64 31 32 79 Hafnium Hassium 1 Helium Holmium Hydrogen Hf Hs He Ho H 72 108 2 67 1 1 Artificially produced; does not occur naturally. Element Symbol Atomic  number Indium Iodine Iridium Iron In I Ir Fe 49 53 77 26 Krypton Kr 36 Lanthanum Lawrencium 1 Lead Lithium Livermorium 1 Lutetium La Lr Pb Li Lv Lu 57 103 82 3 116 71 Magnesium Manganese Meitnerium Mendelevium 1 Mercury Molybdenum Moscovium 1 Mg Mn Mt Md Hg Mo Mc 12 25 109 101 80 42 115 Neodymium Neon Neptunium 1 Nickel Nihonium 1 Niobium Nitrogen Nobelium 1 Nd Ne Np Ni Nh Nb N No 60 10 93 28 113 41 7 102 Oganesson 1 Osmium Oxygen Og Os O 118 76 8 Palladium Phosphorus Platinum Plutonium 1 Polonium Potassium Praseodymium Promethium Protactinium Pd P Pt Pu Po K Pr Pm Pa 46 15 78 94 84 19 59 61 91 Element Symbol Atomic  number Radium Radon Rhenium Rhodium Roentgenium 1 Rubidium Ruthenium Rutherfordium 1 Ra Rn Re Rh Rg Rb Ru Rf 88 86 75 45 111 37 44 104 Samarium Scandium Seaborgium 1 Selenium Silicon Silver Sodium Strontium Sulfur Sm Sc Sg Se Si Ag Na Sr S 62 21 106 34 14 47 11 38 16 Tantalum Technetium Tellurium Tennessine 1 Terbium Thallium Thorium Thulium Tin Titanium Tungsten Ta Tc Te Ts Tb Tl Th Tm Sn Ti W 73 43 52 117 65 81 90 69 50 22 74 Uranium U 92 Vanadium V 23 Xenon Xe 54 Ytterbium Yttrium Yb Y 70 39 Zinc Zirconium Zn Zr 30 40
Periods with f : Periods with f orbitals orbitals In the 6th and 7th periods a further series of energy levels, the f orbitals, are available in each case after the secondary group IIIb lanthanum and actinium. These are taken up by the electrons of the elements of the lanthanides . The lanthanides are also known by the term "rare earths". All actinides are radioactive.
The arrangement of the elements in the periodic table according to the energy  position of their electron orbitals becomes clear in the energy level diagram . It can be seen that for higher orbital energies after the occupation of the s orbital the p , dand f orbitals subordinate to this principal quantum number are no longer automatically filled with electrons. For  example, it is now understandable why the secondary group elements scandium through zinc with the orbital energies 3d after the element calcium are placed into the 4th period of the periodic table. For higher nuclear charge numbers, however, the differences between the orbital energies are so small that the energy sequence of the orbitals shown in the energy level diagram no longer applies to each individual element in the periodic table. In these cases the exact energy  position is influenced by the partial, semi or full occupation of the orbitals by electrons. This can be seen in the case of the lanthanides with the 4f orbitals, which are only placed after the element lanthanum into the 6th period and not as would be expected according to the energy level diagram already after the element  barium.
Isotopes Isotopes are atoms of the same element with the same number of protons but with a different mass number, i. e. with a different number of neutrons. To give isotopes a unique designation, the mass number is given at top left next to the atom symbol and the number of protons is given at  bottom left so that the number of neutrons can be calculated straight away by subtraction. Most naturally occurring elements are isotopic mixtures. Carbon, for example, is made up 98.89 % of 6 12C and 1.11 % of 6 13C. The proportion of 6 14C is at 10 10 % very low. 6 14C in comparison with 6 12C  and 6 13C not a stable isotope. The ratio  of 6 14C to 6 12C is used in the radiocarbon method to determine the age of organic matter.
Nuclides The term nuclide is broadly defined. All atoms that differ in the constitution of their nucleus are called nuclides. The number of nuclides therefore corresponds to the number atom types. The 8th Edition of the Karlsruhe Nuclide Chart in 2012 lists 3,847 experimentally verified nuclides and isomers. Isomers are nuclides which have the same mass number and thus the same number of protons and neutrons.
Isomeric nuclides, however, show differences in the internal state of the atomic nuclei. Atomic nuclei can assume excited states as well as the normal state. Only around 270 nuclides are stable. The  majority of nuclides are radioactive and are therefore called radionuclides.
of the electron orbitals UAN0239 2E 7p 6p 5p 4p 6d 5d 5f 4f 4d 3d 3p 2p 7s 6s 5s 4s 3s 2s 1s spdfEnergy States
protons and two neutrons. The mass number of the atomic nucleus is reduced by 4 and the nuclear charge number by 2. A different element is created .
cannot be discussed further at this stage. g decay decay In the case of g decay the atomic nucleus emits internal energy from excited nucleus states which for the most part arise during aor b decay. The g radiation emitted during g decay does not change the mass number; the element remains intact .
Half life: Half life Radioactive decay is a monomolecular reaction in which the decaying share per unit of time is directly proportional to the available quantity.  Because the available quantity constantly diminishes due to the radioactive decay continuously taking place, the reaction rate decreases more and more. The halflife of the radionuclide is specified so that the rate of radioactive decay can be  described independently of the quantity. The half life is the period of time after which half the atomic nuclei have decayed. The shorter the half life of the  radioactive element, the higher its specific activity, i. e. the more nuclear decays  occur per unit of mass.
Element spectroscopy All chemical elements differ in their atomic structure and can therefore be identified by means of their electron spectra and quantified into mixtures . To release electrons from their energy levels, it is necessary to supply energy to the order of their binding energy from an outside source.
Auger electron spectroscopy Auger electron spectroscopy The energy released by advancing electrons can be output as fluorescent radiation, but can also be transmitted to other electrons. An electron can leave the atom with the transmitted energy. These electrons from the so called Auger process likewise contain highly specific element information, since the following contributions determine the energy of the Auger electron: The orbital energy of the originally driven out electron, the energy that is released by the advancing electron, and the energy of the electron emitted in the Auger process itself . The energy of the emitted electrons is analyzed in Auger electron spectroscopy.
Emission spectrometry Emission spectrometry The less tightly bound outer valence electrons can already be thermally excited and thereby raised to higher, unoccupied energy levels. Because the energy from the flame of a gas torch is not sufficient to excite the valence electrons of all the elements, a plasma is often used for  excitation. In the case of inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry , the light released during the fallback of the valence electrons that is in the visible and ultraviolet range is registered. As with the inner electrons, the energy difference between the outer occupied and unoccupied energy levels is also element specific.
Atomic absorption spectroscopy: Atomic absorption spectroscopy Instead of emitted radiation, light absorption can also be measured through the excitation of the valence electrons. To this end, in atomic absorption spectroscopy  the emitted radiation of the element to be analyzed is irradiated by a hollowcathode lamp. When the element in the sample matches the element of the hollow cathode, the excitation of the electrons in the sample causes a weakening in the  intensity of the excitation light. Because the verification of different elements  accordingly requires an extensive range of materials for hollow cathode lamps and can only be measured sequentially, atomic absorption spectroscopy has not established itself in multi element analyses.
X ray photoelectron spectroscopy X ray photoelectron spectroscopy In X ray photoelectron spectroscopy . The kinetic energy of valence electrons can be determined very precisely such that even conclusions can be made as to the type of chemical bonds by way of differences in the orbital energies.
X ray diffraction X ray diffraction X ray diffraction on solids is, as the name suggests, not a spectroscopic procedure. The X radiation diffracted on the crystal lattice is registered with angular resolution, i. e. according to its diffraction angle . The angle position, intensity and width of the diffraction peaks enable the lattice structure to be analyzed and thus crystals to be identified and lattice distortions can also be determined in mixtures. Internal mechanical stresses of components can likewise be determined.
Chemical bonds The type of bond which tends to be adopted by the individual elements is determined by the number and arrangement of electrons around the atomic nucleus  . The nature of these bonds can differ greatly. A distinction is made between ionic, covalent and metallic bonds. Single atoms without a chemical bond occur in nature in noble gases and in some elements in the vapor phase.
Additional, but far weaker interactions exist between molecules, i. e. particles which are composed of two or more  atoms. The weak attractive forces, which have different physical causes, mean that not only ions but also molecules adopt a short range order, which is only eliminated in the gaseous phase.
Ionic bonds Ionic bonds tend to form in compounds between metallic and non metallic elements. This results in the transfer of electrons. Metal atoms  become negatively charged anions. The terms "cation" for a positively and "anion" for a negatively charged ion are so called because these ions move in an aqueous solution in the electric field to the oppositely charged electrodes, i. e. the cation to the negatively charged cathode and the anion to the positively charged anode.
The number of lost and gained electrons : is determined by the electron configuration of the element. Ionic compounds with configurations in which the p , dand forbitals are empty, half full and full are especially preferred.
The ionic compounds created are called salts. In a solid the cation and anion are arranged in an ionic lattice whose structure is determined by the ratio of ionic radii. When salts are melted or dissolved in water, the forces between the ions in the lattice must be overcome. Therefore heat of fusion . If the solvent is water, the heat is called heat of hydration. If the  energy of dissociation is greater than the heat of solvation, the solution cools during the dissolving process. When anhydrous metal salts are dissolved in which initially water is also introduced into the ionic lattice, the heat released by hydration is often greater than the energy consumption to overcome the lattice forces, and the solution heats up.
Covalent bonds Bonds of electron pairs which are created between two neutral atoms from the unpaired electrons in the outer orbitals all the atoms have a noble gas configuration. Carbon has in the p orbitals two valence electrons and four free spaces for further electrons which are made available by the four hydrogen atoms. Carbon thus achieves the noble gas configuration of neon. Because the two atoms share the common bonding electron pair, the  hydrogen atoms, which only have in each case one valence electron in the s orbital, also attain the noble gas configuration of helium through the common electron pairs with the carbon. In the case of the main group elements of the 2nd period, the filling of empty orbitals with valence electrons of other atoms until the noblegas configuration is attained is called the octet rule, because then a total of eight electrons, two in sand six in p orbitals, are present.
greater amount of space then bondingelectron pairs. The available free electron pair in ammonia reduces the bond angle to 107.5deg. The water molecule has two available free electron pairs, further  reducing the bond angle to 104.5deg.
In the simplified model presented here covalent atomic bonds are put down to the formation of pairs of valence electrons from atomic orbitals. However, solely  examining atomic orbitals only touches the surface of the complex conditions in a molecule. All the atomic nuclei and  electrons in a molecule influence each other, and the bonding conditions are therefore better described by molecular orbitals. A quantum mechanical examination of molecular orbitals is required to describe double and triple bonds and  delocalized bonding systems in aromatic compounds; it is perfectly sufficient in this case to confine oneself to the valence electrons.
Metallic bonds In metals the atoms are arranged in threedimensional lattices where the valence electrons of the atoms move freely and are therefore often referred to as electron gas. Metals are good conductors of electricity and heat, which can be put down to the free valence electrons. The lattice vibrations of the atoms also control to the thermal conductivity; here the atoms  vibrate freely in their positions in the metal lattice and can easily transmit heat in this way. Here too, a quantum mechanical  examination of molecular orbitals is required to better understand the greater complexities of the electric conductivity of metals. It is possible to derive from this that the electrons reside in energy bands which are formed from molecular orbitals with the smallest energy differences. Between the energy bands are zones which cannot be occupied by electrons.
between the molecules polarized in this way are called van der Waals forces. The bigger the molecule, the more it can be polarized and the stronger the intermolecular forces.
Dipole dipole interactions : Dipole dipole interactions In molecules which are composed of different atoms the charge concentration is continuously displaced . Depending on the size and the charge of the atomic nuclei and inner electrons involved, the valence electron pair is subjected to different degrees of attraction. The property of atoms to attract the bonding electron pair is known as electronegativity. The more strongly attracting, more electronegative atom receives a partially negative charge. Correspondingly, the more weakly attracting atom receives a partially positive charge. The permanent dipoles brought about by a difference in the electronegativity exhibit intermolecular forces that are much stronger than van der Waals forces. These phenomena are called dipole dipole interactions.
The dipole dipole interactions are also influenced by the three dimensional structure of the molecule. Although there are differences in the electronegativity of  carbon and oxygen, carbon dioxide with the same atomic ratio 2:1, however, is a  dipole, because the central oxygen atom has two free electron pairs, which result in an angled structure.
Hydrogen bonds Hydrogen bonds The angled structure of the water molecule facilitates additional dipole dipole interactions . The partially positively charged hydrogen atoms can interact with the free electron pairs of neighboring molecules. In liquid water the additional dipole dipole interactions provide a particular short range structure, which is responsible for water having the highest density at 4 degC. This enables fish to survive in winter because water with the highest density collects at the bottom of frozen lakes.
V alence electrons can be excited with  ultraviolet or visible light  respectively . These procedures are used to explain structures because energy absorption allows conclusions to be drawn about molecular structure. In  Raman spectroscopy the inelastic scattering of monochromatic light of molecules is analyzed. The frequency shifted portions for example resulting from excitation of vibrations provide structural information. Mass spectroscopy on the other hand is not based on the excitation of energy states. In this procedure molecules are ionized and the ions obtained are separated according to their mass to charge ratio and identified.
Substances: Substance term in chemistry The chemical properties of a body are  determined by its material and not by its size and shape. The material of a body is therefore also called substance. Even where the body has a very fine distribution the chemical properties remain the same. However, a large surface can increase the reactivity, as can be seen in nanoparticles.
A substance that is made up of two or more parts which cannot be mixed with each other is termed heterogeneous. An example of a homogeneous solid substance is elementary sulfur. Typical of a heterogeneous solid mixture is granite, which is made up of quartz, feldspar and mica.
Dispersion Dispersion Heterogeneous mixtures are always dispersions. Dispersions consist of at least two different substances which under the prevailing conditions do not or barely dissolve in each other and do not chemically react with each other. Depending on the phases, a distinction is made between suspensions .
Suspension If, for example, clay is added to pure water a homogeneous liquid this creates a heterogeneous mixture of a liquid and a solid which is termed a suspension.
Emulsion Heterogeneous mixtures of two liquids, e. g. water and oil, are called emulsions. Aerosol A heterogeneous mixture of solid or liquid floating particles and a gas is called an aerosol. An example of an aerosol of gases and solids is exhaust gas with soot particles. Exhaust gas with white smoke, which is produced when water and sulfuric acid condense during the starting  operation in the still cold exhaust gas, is on the other hand an aerosol of gases and liquids.
Colloid Colloid The term colloid is used for particles or droplets ranging in size between 1 nm and 1 mm, irrespective of whether the  heterogeneous mixtures are suspensions, emulsions or aerosols.
States of aggregation The three classic states of aggregation  are solid, liquid and gaseous depending on whether the particles are in a fixed position in a solid body, can move in a liquid while maintaining a short range order, or are far apart from each other in a gas. Plasma is a non classic state of aggregation and consists of free electrons and ionized atoms.
The states of aggregation of substances are pressureand temperaturedependent and are described in the state or phase diagrams. State diagrams, in which pressure is plotted against temperature, explain the conditions under which a solid is present, if necessary in different forms, the so called modifications. Modifications refer to the phenomenon when a substance in the solid state occurs in different structural forms. Also following from the state diagrams are the ranges in which a liquid or a gaseous phase is present.
State diagram for carbon State diagram for carbon The state diagram for carbon shows the solid modifications of graphite and diamond , where in ranges of these phases the other modification exists in parallel as a metastable form. Metastable means that the transformation of a modification is inhibited despite its higher  energy content for small changes of state. Graphite is the stable modification at room temperature and atmospheric pressure; diamonds exist however as a metastable structure variant because the transformation into the more stable graphite form is strongly curbed by a high activation  energy.
State diagram for water: State diagram for water The three areas in the state diagram for water show the existence ranges of ice, liquid water and vapor .
Each point on the curves corresponds to a state of equilibrium between the adjacent phases. At the point where the three curves intersect, the triple point TP , all three phases of water at equilibrium with one another. If the temperature or pressure is changed, only one state of aggregation still exists. If temperature and pressure are simultaneously changed in such a way that the new state corresponds to a point on one of the equilibrium curves, two phases exist next to each other.
An increase in temperature always results in a higher proportion of gaseous water, either through greater sublimation or through a higher vapor pressure. Conversely, a higher ambient pressure results in more condensation or resublimation of water vapor. The vapor pressure curve demonstrates that the boiling point of water is dependent on external pressure. At low air pressure or in a vacuum water boils at temperatures below 100 degC.
What is conspicuous is the anomaly that can be observed at the phase transition from solid to liquid. An increase in both temperature and pressure causes ice to liquify. The transformation of ice into liquid water is furthered by pressure,  because water assumes a smaller volume than ice.
A special thermodynamic state is the critical point CP , at which the densities of the gaseous and liquid phases become indistinguishable. At the end of the vaporization curve the two states of aggregation fluid and  gaseous pass into a new state, the  supercritical phase. Water in the supercritical state is a liquid which has a lower density than liquid water below the critical point.
SAN045 2E Pressure p Temperature T 0.01 100 Ice 1 2 3 Critical point Triple point Liquid water Freezing/melting point  Water vapor 374 degC 0.006 220.5 bar 1.0
Substance concentrations: To be able to describe the quantitative proportion of the substances involved in a chemical reaction, it is necessary to have quantitative details which refer to the number of particles involved in the conversion. Owing to the different structure of atomic nuclei all element atoms and naturally also all the resulting molecular compounds differ in mass. It would not be very practicable to reckon with the minute masses of individual atoms or molecules directly. Because it is also helpful for chemical reactions always to consider the same number of particles, the term amount of substance was introduced with the unit "mole".
Amount of substance An amount of substance n of 1 mole always contains the same number of particles and was therefore previously also often referred to as mole number. Irrespective of the chemical element, molecule or type of substance, 1 mole contains approximately 6 1023 particles. This particle number can be experimentally determined and is also known as "Avogadro's number".
Molar mass 1 mole of a substance therefore always consists of around 6 1023 particles. For  element atoms the mass of these particles .
In chemistry the term weight is also used instead of mass. Mass denotes the matter contained, weight the force acting as a result of the gravitational field on this matter. Since the force of gravity on Earth is approximately always the same, often no distinction is made between mass and weight. That is why the term "molar weight" is also widely used.
 a volume of 24.789 l. With regard to the standard conditions, weightand volume specific concentration details about the molar volume can be approximately converted into each other for all gases.
In the case of ideal gases the same particle number always assumes the same volume so that mole percent and percent by volume are identical.
Reactions of substances: Chemical thermodynamics In chemical reactions starting substances are converted into reaction products with different properties. Chemical thermodynamics describes the substance conversion and the accompanying change in the internal energy U, i. e. in the end whether and under what conditions reactions can take place . The reaction path is determined by the amount of absorbed or output energy.
Mechanical work is done for example in an exothermic reaction in which a gas is produced which expands against atmospheric pressure or presses against a membrane or a moving punch.
Enthalpy of reaction Enthalpy of reaction The proportion of the heat of reaction QP or QV can also be described as the difference in heat contents of reaction and starting products and is called the enthalpy of reaction HR. Where heat is absorbed, the reaction is endothermic  are exothermic.
is known as the first law of thermodynamics. As the change in the internal energy U, the enthalpy HR and the work done W are dependent on the pressure and temperature, the standard conditions at 25 degC and 1,013 mbar are referenced and this is indicated at the symbols with a  superscript zero .
Enthalpy of activation Enthalpy of activation Even exothermic reactions often have an initial energy demand despite the released enthalpy of reaction HR. This  enthalpy of activation HA must be expended in order for example to break bonds and establish an activated complex of reacting agents before more energy is released by the creation of new bonds during the formation of the reaction product than was required to break the bonds in the starting products.
Thermodynamically and kinetically Thermodynamically and kinetically  controlled  controlled reaction progression reaction progression The thermodynamically stable, i. e. energetically more favorable reaction product is reproduced in a reaction when the  enthalpy of activation required for substance conversion is applied, e. g. through the supply of heat from the outside  , but this is lower in terms of absolute amount. This product created by kinetic control of the reaction then has a higher internal energy. By choosing the reaction conditions, i. e. for example via the quantity of heat made available to the reaction, it is possible to influence whether the thermodynamically or kinetically controlled product tends to be created.
Catalyst decrease the enthalpy of activa : tion of a reaction and thereby increase the reaction rate; but they cannot shift the thermodynamic equilibrium .
Entropy Entropy The enthalpy of reaction HR alone is not the only factor that determines the direction of a reaction. The distribution of the energy content also plays a role. The evaporation of a liquid takes place despite the required heat of evaporation HV > 0 because the constraints for the individual molecules decrease as a result. The  kinetic energy distributed to the individual molecules passes over from a more  ordered, less probable distribution to a state of lesser order but greater probability. The change in the state of order is  described by way of the characteristic entropy S . Entropy increases in chemical reactions when more molecules are created than abreact, when the temperature rises, or when particles change to a less ordered state of aggregation . The increase in entropy S is greater, the higher the heat input and the lower the temperature T at which the heat is transferred.
Reaction kinetics Whereas thermodynamics describes the conversion of substance and energy,  reaction kinetics is concerned with the velocity or rate of reactions . The reaction rate of a substances involved in the reaction is specified as a change in  concentration per time interval . The order of a reaction is derived from the number of starting substances whose concentration changes during the reaction.
Zero order reaction Zero order reaction A zero order reaction exists for example when the decay of a gas on a platinum surface is heterogeneously catalyzed. The concentration of the gas adsorbed on the catalyst does not change during the reaction such that the reaction rate always remains the same, regardless of the reaction time.
First order reaction: First order reaction In a first order reaction the reaction rate depends only on the concentration of the or a starting product. Many decay processes such as radioactive decay for example follow a first order reaction which is characterized by the fact that the time in which the concentration of the starting product decreases by half is  always the same. The half life is therefore not dependent on the starting concentration.
Second order reaction Second order reaction A reaction between two molecules is called a second order reaction when the reaction rate is determined by the concentration of the two starting substances. If one of the reactands is present in a very large surplus, as is the case for example in hydrolysis reactions in which water is simultaneously the solvent and the reacting agent, the reaction rate equates to that of a first order reaction. This is called a pseudo first order reaction.
With equal starting concentration and starting rate a second order reaction always runs more slowly than a first order reaction. The rate of the two reaction types is dependent on the concentration of the starting substances. In a secondorder reaction, however, it is necessary to factor in that for a substance transformation unlike in a first order reaction a collision of molecules of the two reacting agents is required and also not every collision actually results in a transformation. Third order reaction Third order reaction The probability of a trimolecular reaction, i. e. the simultaneous collision of three particles, is statistically low. For this reason, third order reactions occur only very rarely.
Chemical equilibrium Most chemical reactions are reversible, i. e. an equilibrium is obtained between the starting substances and the reaction products . The position of equilibrium can naturally shift markedly from one side to the other and is influenced by a change in the concentration of a reacting agent, by removal of a reaction product, and by the choice of temperature.
In the reaction of two gaseous substances the conversion can be completed by increasing the pressure when the total  number of molecules decreases due to the substance transformation. Low pressure would result in a worse conversion. Similarly to pressure changes in gas  reactions, changes in concentration also result in liquids. Dilution supports reactions which are accompanied by an increase in the number of particles. Catalysts on the other hand as already described cannot change the position of equilibrium, but can only influence the rate of its onset.
When a salt is dissolved, this creates positively and negatively charged ions, i. e. cations and anions, which are in solubility equilibrium with the undissolved sediment. In a saturated solution the  number of ions which dissolve equals the number of ions which precipitate again. x describes the number of cations A and y the number of anions B in the salt AxBy. The dissolving process sees the creation of x dissolved cations A, whose positive charge is determined by the number y of anions B. This is accompanied by the  creation of y dissolved anions B with a negative charge, which is dependent on the number x of cations A.
However, the law of mass action applies : in this form only to the limiting case of an ideal solution without interaction between the dissolved particles. This is approximately the case with highly diluted solutions as are created when hardly soluble salts are dissolved.
The unit of the solubility product depends on the number of different particle types which are created during the dissolving process. The lower the solubility product, the harder the salt is to dissolve. For improved clarity, as a rule the decimal logarithm of the numerical value of KL multiplied by 1 is specified instead of the solubility product and denoted as pKL. The greater the pKL value, the lesser the solubility.
The proportion of salt that dissolves decays into cations and anions. The process of splitting into separate ions of different charge is frequently called dissociation. The dissolving of salts creates many charge carriers which help to conduct electric current. In aqueous solutions chemists refer to strong electrolytes. In daily laboratory practice calculations are made approximately with concentrations c instead of with activities a. The term "concentration" is used instead of "activity" in the following text, even if the activity is retained as the physical variable in the formulae.
The Ka value is as a rule converted into the pKa value, whereby the Ka value is initially divided by the standard concentration of 1 mol/l. The decimal logarithm multiplied by 1 then produces the pKa value. Strong acids have a low or even negative pKa value.
is divided before logarithmization by the standard concentration of 1 mol/l. The decimal logarithm then multiplied by 1 produces the pH value.
Acidic Basic Hydrochloric acid 1 mol/l Acetic acid 0.1 mol/l Hydrochloric acid 0.1 mol/l Hydrochloric acid 0.0001 mol/l Pure water Ammonia 0.1 mol/l Caustic soda 0.1 mol/l Acetic acid 1 mol/l Ammonia 1 mol/l Caustic soda 1 mol/l 0 7 14 Neutral
0.1 mol . A 10 1 molar hydrochloric acid solution therefore has a pH value of 1.
ions are created. As the dissociation is minimal, the dissociated part compared with the total concentration of acetic acid CH3COOH can be disregarded.
Electrochemistry : When a salt is dissolved in water, the constituents of the salt are present in the water in the form of ions. These ions are charged in such a way that they move when an electric field is applied and thereby generate an electric current. This phenomenon is known as electrolytic conduction. In comparison, the current in an electric conductor such as copper or iron is transported by electrons. In addition to aqueous solutions, molten salts but also certain solids .
Negatively charged ions move towards the anode and are therefore called anions, while positively charged ions migrate towards the cathode. A chemical reaction takes place at these electrodes whereby the ions either absorb electrons from the cathode or discharge electrons to the anode. These reactions can only occur when the cathode and anode have an electrically conductive connection with each other in order to facilitate the exchange of electrons between the two. If a battery is used as the voltage source, i.e., discharged, the electrons flow from the anode via the external electric circuit to the cathode. Thus, for the user the anode is the negative pole and the cathode is the positive pole.
the redox reaction is thus added up from : the individual values. The balance equation thus does not feature any electrons, as these are only exchanged between the reacting agents.
cannot dissolve copper, silver, platinum, and gold. These are referred to as noble metals. In contrast, base metals such as sodium, elemental iron, nickel and lead are attacked by acids and the metals are dissolved as ions.
To enable an electrochemical reaction to take place, at least two different reacting agents are required. The resulting electrochemical total voltage E is dependent on the concentration of ions .
Here, the concentration of reduced ions, n the number of electrons in the reaction equation, R the gas constant, T the absolute temperature, and F the Faraday constant.
In this way, the potential can be calculated for each chemical partial reaction of the individual ion types. The total voltage of the electrolytic reactions is obtained from the sum total of all the potentials of the partial reactions. Over and above that E is dependent on the temperature.
Here pA the oxygen partial pressure in the reference area, R the gas constant, T the absolute temperature, and F the Faraday constant. ________________________________ References References K. H. Lautenschlager, W. Weber: Taschenbuch der Chemie. Edition Harri Deutsch, 21st Edition, 2013.
 L. Spiess, G. Teichert, R. Schwarzer, H. Behnken, C. Genzel: Moderne Rontgenbeugung Rontgendiffraktometrie fur Materialwissenschaftler, Physiker und Chemiker. Springer Verlag, 3rd Edition, 2013.
 M. Hesse, H. Meier, B. Zeeh: Spektroskopische Methoden in der Organischen Chemie. Thieme Verlag Stuttgart, 8th Edition, 2011.
The binary and hexadecimal systems are used primarily in the field of information technology . These two states form the basis of the binary system. When eight binary digits are combined into one byte, it is then possible to represent the numbers 0 to 255, which corresponds to the hexadecimal digits 0 FF. Functions The following section describes elementary mathematics functions. Their most important properties, such as their domain and value set, their behavior for very large and very small x values, their zero points, their derivations and the fundamental arithmetic operations with them are depicted.
These functions have been selected from a very large number of functions since they can be used to illustrate many technical processes, such as the geometric correlations between a connecting rod and moving mechanical parts .
Decimal Hexadecimal 0, 1 9 0, 1 9 10, 11 15 A, B F 16 10 17 11 30 1E 31 1F 32 20 255 FF 4096 1000 65535 FFFF
___ 2a   A parabola may have zero, one or two zero points.
tasks such as solving quadratic equations .
Exponential function The exponential function is a very important function in mathematics, physics and technology, because it is the only function that is identical to its own derivative. This central property is used in solving linear differential equations such as the harmonics equation .
Both the sine and cosine functions are related to the complex exponential function . This means the exponential function can be used to describe oscillations.
Here, the real negative exponent g t represents the damping of the oscillation, while the complex exponent iot reflects the periodic quantity, which becomes clear from the representation of the sine and cosine functions .
Furthermore, laws of growth .
Application examples Application examples The Nernst equation provides one example of application of the logarithm function. This equation calculates the voltage value from the concentration of oxygen in the surroundings and the exhaust gas, which is necessary for l regulation .
In acoustics, decibel level . Similarly, logarithms are also used to determine the sound power level and sound intensity level.
The unit "rad" is often added to an arc measurement to make it clear that the information relates to an angle. Arc x of the angle ph is shown in Figure 6. Angle ph of the associated arc x is shown as a curved arrow.
__ T  The angular frequency o still contains the factor 2p; thus, it specifies the angle covered per unit of time.
When a car drives on a street or a country road, it is constantly subjected to large and small bumps and shocks. Therefore, the undercarriage must be constructed so that it absorbs or compensates for the bumps in the road. In addition, the vibrational characteristics of the shock absorbers should be designed with precision .
If oscillations with the same angular fre : quency are superimposed, they can be amplified . This depends on the phase relation and the amplitudes of the relevant oscillations.
For example, destructive interference is utilized as "anti noise" at airports. This involves having speakers produce sounds with the same frequency as the turbine noise from airplanes. The anti noise and noise are out of phase with one another, canceling each other out, reducing the noise for nearby residents.
of sides a, b and c and any angles a, b and g. The relationship between these quantities is described by the following equations.
The relationships between angles in a triangle play an important role in the design of components. One example of this would be the gear design in a reciprocating piston engine, where the piston stroke and length of the connecting rod are  related to one another by the angle of the crankshaft position and the leg angle of the connecting rod .
A complex number z has a real component .
In many cases, complex numbers aid in making complicated mathematical problems easier to solve. Frequently, only the real part or the imaginary part of the complex solution is necessary in finding the real solution.
Similarly, all the points on a plane can be expressed by their Cartesian coordinates , and converted into one another.
ing Cartesian coordinates. However, the : corresponding equations are significantly more complicated in comparison to a description in polar coordinates .
Coordinate systems  in three dimensions Each point in a three dimensional space has three Cartesian coordinates . This representation is used frequently when the system to be described is at a right or oblique angle. However, if the problem relates to a rotationally symmetrical or a spherically symmetrical system, using cylindrical or spherical coordinates is recommended.
In Figure 11, the x, y and z coordinate axes are delineated. Here, the distance r of point P to the origin and the two angles th and ph, which can be measured from the z or the x axis. r, th and ph are labeled as spherical coordinates or spatial polar  coordinates.
With the exception of the origin , the coordinates for each point are clearly defined in both Cartesian and polar coordinates. Conversion between both coordinate system occurs as follows.
is equivalent to the angle th in spherical coordinates, which is measured starting from the north pole and is between 0deg and 180deg .
Just like the spherical coordinates, any point can be clearly expressed in cylindrical coordinates, with the exception of the origin .
Just like the polar coordinates, cylindrical coordinates are calculated on a plane and they are expanded by the addition of the z axis.
Cylindrical coordinates can be used in the design of rotationally symmetrical objects, such as tubes, engine cylinders, screws, nuts, and anti friction and friction bearings.
Both vectors  _ > a  and  _ > c  span the length  of a plane E. The cross product  formed from  _ > a  and  _ > c points perpendicular  to both output vectors. ph is the angle  between  _ > a  and  _ > c .
The scalar product of both vectors _>F and _>s  with the projection _>Fs of the vector _>F on _>s.
in the direction of : _>c and the resulting vector _> m in the direction of the middle finger on the right hand.
In order to be able to distinguish the cross product from the scalar product, an "x" is placed between the vectors as a multiplication symbol.
cx cy cz    axcy aycx __ > m   _ > a ,  __ > m   _ > c , _ > a ,  _ > c ,  __ > m are "right handed" with the unit vectors  _ > e x,  _ > e y and  _ > e z in x, y and z direction.
The cross product becomes zero when both vectors point in the same or opposite direction . This lets you use the cross product to check if two vectors span one plane. In this case, the cross product does not equal zero.
steep a function is or where the function attains its maximum or minimum values is often of interest as well. This can be described using differentiation of a function.
Higher derivatives Higher derivatives If the first derivative is differentiated again, then this becomes the second derivative. Higher derivatives can be formed in a similar way.
Antiderivative Antiderivative In order to find a solution to this problem, the antiderivative F . Its property is expressed in the fundamental theorem of differential and integral calculus.
Partial integration Partial integration In addition to searching for the antiderivative, there are two helpful methods for solving for integrals for partial integration and integration through substitution. Partial integration is the inverse of the product rule for the derivative.
Substitution Substitution Substitution is the inverse of the chain rule. The art of substitution lies in finding the appropriate function that can be replaced .
Linear differential equations: In many technical problems, a function is being sought that can describe the task but is not explicitly specified. Instead, information about its curvature properties  or a combination of the two is provided in the form of an equation.
lected. If the function g.
The differential equation above is linear, since y.
The numbers A1, A2,...An are real numbers and are labeled as integration constants. If initial or ancillary conditions are given for the function, then the values A1, A2,..., An can be calculated from these conditions.
After finding the homogeneous solution, a special solution yih for the non homogeneous differential equation needs to be found; this then provides the complete solution.
Linear differential equations of the second order with constant coefficients are the basis of all oscillation processes .
__ c2  2f ___ t 2  , c P R, is an example of a partial differential equation. It is significantly more complicated to solve both of these types of differential equations than it is to solve the linear differential equations described above. For more information and a more detailed approach to these differential equations, the extensive literature from the bibliography should be consulted, including , or the specialized literature regarding special types of differential equations.
Laplace transform: There are many control loops in a vehicle .
Alternatively, the Laplace transform can also be utilized if initial values like y.
In order to solve for the integral, the absolute value of the function must be exponentially bound. s merely acts as a variable in the transformation .
Fourier transform: During analysis, a time dependent function is often found f .
In the literature, values of 1 , 1/2p or 1/ ___ 2p  are sometimes specified as the prefactor for the Fourier transform. This also changes the factor of the inverse transform. The critical aspect here is that the product of the transform's prefactors and the inverse transform yield 1/2p.
For example, the Fourier transform is used to determine the frequencies of signals .
exponential function of the Laplace integral usually contains an arbitrary complex exponent s x, while this term i o x is  normally completely imaginary in the case of a Fourier integral.
Matrix calculus: Vectors can indicate the intensity and direction of forces or of a velocity . In the case of a circular motion this can be easily represented using a vector, which specifies the initial direction of motion, together with a matrix, which describes the rotation.
Furthermore, matrices play the central role in solving systems of linear equations which occur in many technical questions. In order for example to calculate mechanical or thermal stresses in a component, complicated nonlinear differential equations are numerically solved. The standard method used for this purpose is the finite element method .
Firstly, matrices will be introduced in the following. Then arithmetical operations with matrices such as addition and multiplication will be defined. To conclude, three solution methods for systems of linear equation will be presented.
a square matrix. The standouts among these are the upper and lower triangular matrices, the diagonal matrices, and the unit matrix. An upper or lower triangular matrix has different entries on the diagonal and above or below zero; below or above the diagonals there are only zeros.
A diagonal matrix D has different elements akk only on the diagonal. The unit matrix E is a diagonal matrix with ones as entries.
It must be noted in this connection that when multiplying two matrices as a rule the order may not be mixed up .
Geometric interpretation of a system : of linear equations Each row of a system of linear equations can be interpreted geometrically as a hyperplane. Thus, the approach when solving a system of linear equations is to look for the points where these hyperplanes intersect. This is clearly shown in Figure 1 by way of example at two or three planes in R3: When the planes are parallel to each other, they do not intersect. Two planes intersect on a straight line. The latter corresponds exactly to a solution of the system of linear equations.
Several thousand parts are required to : produce an automobile. Since fluctuations occur in every production process, not only the size for example of each part but also the associated tolerance is specified.
Even the measurement process is as a rule subject to random fluctuations, which are referred to as measurement uncertainty .
This measurement uncertainty should however be well below the tolerance limit of the part to be measured so that it can normally be disregarded.
Measurements play a central role in production and hence in this connection in quality assurance. Since the required failure rate must be very low for individual parts, i.e. often in the ppm range , it is for the most part not possible for process technical and economic reasons to measure all the parts. Instead, samples are taken in order then to infer the quality of the components with statistical methods. These statistical methods are presented in the following.
The aim of a production process is to work accurately and precisely. Accurate means that the mean value of the target figure is close to the specified value. Precise denotes the production when the dispersion  around the mean value is low. It is possible to check using the statistical methods set out in the following whether these requirements are satisfied.
Descriptive statistics For the purpose of obtaining an overview of extensive data material, these data are summarized and illustrated in descriptive statistics in tables and graphics. In this way, already systematic errors can often be detected and eliminated. However, it is not possible with descriptive statistics to specify error probabilities, which can only be made on the basis of statistical parameter models of inductive statistics.
ment with specification of the absolute frequency of the measured value SAN0259E Length Frequency h 190 192 194 196 198 200 202 204 mm 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
To characterize a data set and to be able to compare this with other data sets, characteristic values such as the location parameters and dispersion parameters are calculated from this.
Location parameters and location measures The median xmed, also called the central value, is the value in the middle of a data series {x1, x2,..., xn} when the values are sorted by size. In other words, at least half of the data is less than or equal to xmed and at the same time at least half of the data is greater than or equal to xmed. In the case of an even number of data, xmed is the mean value of the two data in the middle of the series.
The symbol m is often used as well as the symbol  _  x  for the mean value.
Probability calculus: The quality of a production process is to be inferred from a sample . This is however only possible if realistic assumptions about the distribution of this measured value are made. A number of probability distributions are presented in the following for this purpose. The Binomial distribution, the Hypergeometric distribution and the Poisson distribution are discrete distributions. Here, a sample is taken from a quantity and then the corresponding probabilities are calculated. From a mathematical standpoint both the sample size and the size of the quantity from which the sample is taken are natural numbers.
On the other hand, the Weibull distribution and the Gaussian normal distribution apply to continuous distributions, i.e. to real variables t or x.
connection is drawing a ball from a bowl containing balls of two different colors. The ball is returned to the bowl after each draw. Hence the probability for each removal of a sample is the same.
Hypergeometric distribution Hypergeometric distribution This distribution often plays a role in quality and final inspections. Similarly to the previous bowl model, there are at the start m white and n m red balls in a bowl. In contrast to the binomial distribution, this distribution corresponds to drawing a ball without putting it back, was which is customary for a sample in production. Hence, with each sample removal, the probability of drawing a white ball changes.
A binomial distribution can be well approx : imated by a Poisson distribution if the following two conditions are satisfied: n p < 10, n > 1500 p.
Weibull distribution Weibull distribution The fatigue of a material and the failure of a machine can often be described via a Weibull distribution over the time t .
1 _____  ___ 2 p  s  e  2 ______ 2 s 2   , < x <.
1 _____  ___ 2 p  s    x  e  . As the name already suggests, this is normalized, i.e.
____  ___ 2p     y  e  1 __ 2 z2 dz , < y <.
The 6s level , i.e. 3.410 6 of the parts are outside the tolerance band.
Parameter estimation in the Gaussian normal distribution Quantitative statements based on samples are to be made with the aid of statistical models . The aim would be to determine characteristic values such as, for example, the mean value m and the standard deviation s. But this is not exactly possible since the sample is limited. However, it is possible to calculate from the sample estimates for the mean value and the standard deviation and for this to determine confidence intervals with which the sought after characteristic value is in this interval with a specified probability.
Parameter estimations are carried out in the following, where it is assumed that there is an underlying Gaussian normal distribution. This distribution underlies very many production processes. For the parameter estimations for other distributions, reference is made to the bibliography .
the right side can be calculated and then D z for example viewed in a table for the normally distributed Gaussian function, and finally from this D x calculated.
Confidence interval for unknown mean Confidence interval for unknown mean value and unknown variance value and unknown variance From the sample first the estimates of the mean value   __  x and the standard deviation s are calculated. Similarly to before, in the case of a specified confidence level g  the confidence interval of the breadth D x in which the unknown mean value m lies with a probability of g is to be determined, i.e.
samples a) Mean value lies exactly in the middle of the lower and upper limits, b) Mean value is closer to the upper limit.  _  x  Mean value, LL Lower limit, UL Upper limit.
In standard production cp >= 1.33 and cpk >= 1.33 are classed as guide values for a stable process which satisfies the quality requirements.
 A. Steland: Basiswissen Statistik. 3rd Ed., Verlag Springer Spektrum, 2013.
Applications: Virtually all technical procedures can be simulated on a computer with the finite element method FEM . Small elements are important because the behavior of elements formulated by approximation using linear equations is only applicable to infinitesimal elements. However, the computing time calls for finite elements. The approximation to reality is better the smaller the elements are.
The application of FEM in practice also known as FEA .
dard for the Exchange of Product Model Data). The FEM program calculates the computing model formulated in this way. The result found is then shown in graphic form in the postprocessor .
Basic knowledge for application FEM is, like all numerical methods, an approximation process. In mechanics, the main area of application, the limitations caused by this are described in the following.
Small motions in one solution step Small motions in one solution step Bodies move on paths which are normally higher order curves. With the basic principle of linearization of all processes, this motion is limited to a straight path which can then be described by linear equations. When transferred to the element corners . The actual motion along any path or nonlinear material behavior is thus solved linearly with many small steps.
accuracy of 13 significant digits for the number stored, i.e. only the first 13 digits of a number can be represented exactly. The further digits in this number are random numbers. As a result, this rules out the possibility of any stiffness differences of the individual components in a model. Therefore, in the deformation calculation of a body, it is necessary, as for example in the measurement of body deformation, to replace the axle springs with rigid supports.
Interpretation of results: Interpretation of results The great danger lies in the fact that a formal computation model formulated correctly by a beginner will indeed deliver beautifully colorful images, but the results shown can center around factors far from reality.
The problems resulting from the abovementioned limitations must therefore be identified and signaled by the computing program, so that the less experienced user is also able to obtain correct results easily.
Elements of FEM The properties of the elements define the most important performance data of an FEM program. The element quality is determined by the degree of the mathematical formulation function selected. Here, for example, a distinction is made between elements with a linear or quadratic formulation, recognizable from the midside node in the middle of the edge. The quality of a computing model is therefore dependent not just on the fineness of the used mesh, but also quite considerably on the formulation function.
Line elements Line elements Line elements for bending stress calculation.
Shell elements Shell elements Shell elements are either triangular or quadrangular in shape ideally an equilateral triangle or a square, usually of constant thickness. If the midside nodes are omitted, the edges are straight.
or a cube. With a sufficient number of elements in relation to the thickness , elements with midside nodes are not necessary today. However, this does not apply to tetrahedrons, which are almost alway used in the case of a complicated geometry, such as a cylinder head for example.
Modeling and evaluation of results The most important function in using an FEM program is the usually time consuming task of creating the input data as a computing model with the preprocessor. The user should try to achieve this target with as few elements and nodes as possible . These can differ slightly in every FEM program.
The first step in modeling involves choosing the element type . To this end, the postprocessor offers all the conceivable forms of display.
b 1 x z y 5 6 7 8 4 3 2 u u a 1 x z y 5 4 3 2 u u 6 SAN0092 2Y SAN0091 2Y
FEM examples: For the examples, modeling is performed on the basis of CAD geometry using the FEM program TP 2000. The model inputs, together with color representation of the results, can also be found on the Internet page specified in .
In reality, all bodies are three dimensional. In simulation, a simplified solution is often chosen in order to save time and expense. It is much easier, for example, to realize the automatic meshing of a flat surface in shell elements than it is to realize a body in its volume elements. The frequently used tetrahedron mesh, which today every preprocessor creates for any volume geometry, does not always live up to expectations.
In automobile manufacturing, the structural components are either thick walled and solid and are modeled with shell and line elements.
The first example, as a volume element model, belongs to the first group of thickwalled, solid components. It is compared with the commonly used shell model of the second group. This also includes the line element commonly used in automobile manufacturing with the second example.
Example 1: Cast steel engine mount as shelland volume element model . Starting out from the CAD volume geometry, the preprocessor automatically creates volume element networks A and B, and also shell element model C by means of the surface model.
The material properties in the units mm, N and kg are: Modulus of elasticity: 210,000 N/mm2 Poisson's ratio: 0.3 Density: 0.00000785 kg/mm3.
first had to be broken down into basic bod : ies) and in model B, the automatic tetrahedron meshing. The number of elements in relation to thickness which is crucial for accuracy is specified .
ure 5 shows the result for model A with stresses as shades of gray or as isocolors in the original.
viation between averaged and maximum node stress . This is achieved with model A1 at 11 % with three elements per thickness.
stress is also 25 %. With only two tetrahedrons in relation to the thickness, the model would even be 58 % too rigid and can barely be used with correspondingly lower stresses. However, with midside nodes , it delivers virtually identical deformations and stresses to A2 with a very large number of nodes and long computing times. Caution is therefore advised with rough tetrahedron mesh without midside nodes.
stress in MPa Stress  error max. in % Computing  time in sec A1 C Rectangular shell 766 0.114 0.081 197 223 14 2 SAN0095 2Y
Example 2: Tubular body frame The aim is to carry out an FEM analysis on a body in the form of a spaceframe without sheet paneling, including optimized weight and stiffness for the example of a mini pickup . The material properties are: Modulus of elasticity: 200,000 N/mm2  Poisson's ratio: 0.3  Density: 0.00000785 kg/mm3.
.
2 Side pillar,  3 Pedal cross pillar,  7 Cockpit cross pillar,  8 Side pillar, front, 10 Auxiliary cross pillar, front, 14 Roof frame, side, 15 Roof frame, lateral, 16 Rear subframe, 17 Side pillar, box, 19 Bumper, rear.
springs, the lower eigenvalues and modes of the undamped, elastic system in ascending order; for free/free beginning with several rigid body vibration modes with the natural frequency 0 in each case.
as the 1st torsional vibration, the 3rd eigenvalue . Absolute values are only obtained in the event of an excitation calculation.
Weight and stiffness optimization Weight and stiffness optimization The computation formula for weight and stiffness optimization has been known since the 1960s is obtained from the stiffness change of the component multiplied by the deformation process ratio of the component, divided by 100.
This formula is used specifically for optimization purposes in virtually all automobile critical "Torsion" load cases with consideration of the other load cases. In this way, the structure can be reinforced using pillars that take most of the load, and reduce weight via the pillars that take less of the load.
change . The weight increase here is 3.55 kg when the tube diameter is increased from 70 to 90 mm.
. The weight reduction is 3.34 kg when the tube diameter is reduced from 70 to 50 mm.
A look at the strain energy charts of the other load cases  shows that this also applies to torsional vibration and is of no importance to bending. It is thus possible to significantly increase the torsional stiffness and flexural bending stiffness of this body still further and to safely reduce the total weight by reducing the cross sections of oversized components.
Part  Deformation process in %, sum total 9,026 Nmm. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 10.76 7.33 1.48 2.49 2.64 10.41 5.31 1.00 1.74 3.41 2.31 3.08 7.72 14.57 6.48 10.91 2.86 5.51 x y z x y z UAN0102 1Y
Terms and definitions: .
Closed loop control operations are performed at many points in a motor vehicle. Further examples include control of cooling water temperature, A/C control, and many other control operations from the engine .
Open loop control Open loop control is essentially also used instead of closed loop control. In this case, the closed loop controlling system is replaced by an open loop controlling system and feedback of the controlled variable is omitted. This process is only then possible if the behavior of the controlled system is known exactly and if no  disturbances z are acting on the controlled system.
Open loop control is preferred here as no stability problems can arise on account of there being no feedback. Because the previously mentioned preconditions are rarely satisfied in practice, the use of closed loop control is for the most part unavoidable.
Combination of openand closedloop control Openand closed loop control are, in practice, frequently combined in order to exploit the specific advantages of the two structures. Here, established interconnections between reference variable, disturbance, correcting variable and controlled variable are linked as much as possible in order to realize these as open loop control. Deviations that still arise on account of changed parameters or nonmeasurable disturbances are corrected by closed loop control .
The controller design is simplified by this separation of the control task into several manageable subtasks. There are additional advantages in the dynamic response due to the fact that disturbances which act in the internal control loop are corrected there before they affect the external control loop. This makes the entire control operation quicker. Likewise, nonlinear characteristic curves of the internal loop can be linearized.
Cascade control is used in many control systems in motor vehicles, e.g. in current control for electrohydraulic actuators or in position control for electric motor actuators.
UAN0184 1E Controlled system y2 y1 w2 w1 u Controlled system 1 Controlled system 2 Controller 2 Controller 1 Secondary controlled variable Controlled variable
The task of control loop synthesis is to design, for a given controlled system, the matching controller , which are individually supplemented by specific functions or design steps.
Designing a control task Control task Typically the control task is not specifically formulated as such, but must be elaborated as the result of requirements in the specific technical process. This involves defining the openand closed loop control tasks in the system in order to settle the questions as to what is to be achieved with the control function and with which variables the objective is described. Controlled demand response shifting in an automatic transmission is mentioned as an example. With this function, the clutch pressure of the shifting clutch is to be aligned during the gear shift to the speed gradient in such a way that the slip time remains constant under all operating conditions, even with variable parameters .
shifting in an automatic transmission 1 s Clutch Shiftingpressure calculation Engine torque Clutch pressure Setpoint value Speed gradient Setpoint slip time Output speed Gear step Input speed gradient Input speed D T1 filter Controller Setpoint input SAN0193 1E
It should be possible already to obtain a : fundamental system understanding of the operative connections from the system diagram and the block diagram. As long as the system is still in development it should at this point still be possible to exert an influence on the structural design of the system as contemplated by an overall mechatronic approach. The filling behavior of a hydraulically actuated clutch is mentioned as an example. This should be designed in such a way that a reproducible behavior with as little dead time as possible is provided on the basis of line cross sections, volumes and sealing behavior.
Controlled system The controlled system is then identified. This can be done theoretically or practically, e.g. by measuring the step response or the frequency response. It is recommended that both methods are followed and an adjustment carried out. Identification is a very comprehensive process, depending on the task. Sometimes it is sufficient to determine only the basic type and the order of the controlled system.
Controller design The controller is designed on the basis of the result of the identification this is the central task of controller synthesis. It is advisable for this first to be conducted theoretically using simulations, during which the controller parameters are set at the same time. If this step is sufficiently validated, startup follows on the real controlled system on the test bench or in the vehicle. Recursion steps are usually performed once again here in order to achieve further optimizations.
Design criteria Over and above this fundamental sequence, reference is made to the following additional criteria: Digital control The majority of control operations in a motor vehicle are implemented on microcontrollers. In this case, it is necessary to suitably establish the sampling time, oriented towards the dynamic response of the controlled system. It is necessary to ensure here that all the function algorithms can be calculated in the time available between two samplings.
Nonlinearities Nonlinearities In many cases, the simple linear methods described above are not sufficient, since real controlled systems contain nonlinearities . In simple cases, where static continuous nonlinearities are involved, these can be compensated for by an additional inverse behavior transfer element. In the case of control operations with small signal amplitudes about an operating point, the system equations can be linearized at this point, otherwise more complex procedures are called for.
Structure switchovers Structure switchovers Many closed loop control operations are first initiated by open loop controlled signals are correctly initialized.
Robustness Robustness The control is typically designed with a "nominal" controlled system. In practice, however, manufacturing tolerances dictate that controlled systems are encountered which deviate up to a defined extent from this nominal definition. Furthermore, the parameters change over the service life, e.g. due to clutch wear or depending on third variables . In none of these cases should this give rise to significant functional impairments or instability of the control loop. Different procedures from the field of "robust control" or "adaptive control" are available to master these requirements.
Adaptive controllers: Motivation Controlled systems often do not have a constant behavior. Parameters such as time constants and gains change in many cases. Even the structure of the system can change. Adaptations match open and closed loop control processes to a different system behavior. Examples include: Manufacturing tolerances Manufacturing tolerances Not all the products in a batch are 100 % identical. Because an individual adjustment is complicated, the system should adapt itself automatically to different parameters .
Wear Wear Parameters change in response to wear on a reproducible .
Dependence on a third variable  Dependence on a third variable  .
The various requirements to master this problem on an open loop control level result in the desire for adaptive systems, which are described and defined in the following.
Definition of "adaptive control" The behavior of the control is adapted to the changing properties of the controlled system and its signals. Adaptation procedures are thus essentially divided into two steps.
w u y Controlled system Adaptation law Controller UAN0181 1E UAN0182 1E
and that the dependence of the control on : these signals is known . Essentially, an open loop controlled adaptation is initially recommended, i.e. known and metrologically recordable connections are used in open loop controlled form. The advantage of this forward structure can be compared with the advantages of open loop control over closedloop control. A feedback loop, which can possibly cause stability problems, is omitted. For the most part, open loop control adaptive systems are used in practical industrial applications.
of adaptive control be tested? A detailed treatment of the subjects areas of "Design of adaptive control operations" and "Identification of dynamic processes" can be found in .
 G. Bauer; C. Schwemer: Entwurf einer Wandlerkupplungsregelung unter Berucksichtigung nichtfunktionaler Anforderungen. AUTOREG 2008, 4th Symposium Baden Baden, 12 and 13 February 2008, VDI/VDE Gesellschaft Messund Automatisierungstechnik.
Introduction to AI: The aim of "artificial intelligence" is to understand how intelligent behavior works and how it can be implemented with information technology means on computer systems. To this end attempts are made to enable machines, robots, and software systems to process and solve abstractly described tasks and problems independently without each step being programmed by humans. Important subfields are machine learning, knowledge representation, language understanding, and logical closure .
AI systems .
The term system is furthermore based on the following definition: "A system is a set of interconnected components that has an expected behavior observed at the interface with its environment" .
History of AI The establishment of AI as scientific discipline in its own right can be traced back to the "Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence", which took place in 1956 at Dartmouth College in Hanover and was attended by among others John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Herbert Simon, Alan Newell, and Claude Shannon .
ity of physical systems to represent regularities in the behavior of external phenomena in internal models, to analyze these representations, and to use the analysis results to control system behavior.
Through the symbol processing approach cognitive performances were taken as transformations of symbol structures with symbols being directly identified with meaningful units . Some progress was made with this form of highly logic oriented AI, but primarily in areas which could be efficiently described by logical formalisms.
This approach was less successful in fields characterized by high complexity, haziness or uncertainty. Emerging disillusionment led to a marked drop in research investment in AI, the so called "AI winter". Advances in AI Advances in AI The increasing drop off in prices with regard to computing capacity, memory, and connection costs and the associated emergence of cloud computing provided the material basis for implementing machine learning specifically connectionist principles in the form of artificial neural networks . Here "knowledge" and "meaning" are implemented not by explicit symbolic representations but in activity patterns by means of "nodes" and "connections". The process is fundamentally different from classic algorithms not based on AI. In the case of classic algorithms the programmer uses instructions to describe how a given problem is to be solved. In the case of machine learning and ANNs the developer describes not the method but instead, by means of examples, the objective of the problem. In addition, they specifies a learning algorithm which independently searches for an approach towards a solution for the problem.
The resource requirements of elaborated ANNs must not be underestimated here. Thus, in one AlphaGo training cycle  5,000 tensor processing units were used over 40 days which required 192,000 KWh, the equivalent of the annual energy requirement of 32 households in Germany.
pion and best player Lee Sedol at the board game Go. This achievement was all the more remarkable since Go is significantly more complex than chess and it is impossible for supercomputers to search the entire solution space exhaustively.
These successes can lead to abstracting from specific ideal competition conditions and assuming that such systems can be easily transferred to open everyday situations. In actual fact, systems that exhibit impressive superhuman abilities under ideal conditions are must less robust against disruptions or influences that can arise in everyday situations.
Significant applications Thanks to the significant algorithmic advances artificial intelligence has today already arrived on the scene in many products in our everyday lives.
Computer vision A second application of AI that has in the meantime become widely used is computer vision are used to draw conclusions from a camera image. Essentially, this features for example in driver assistance systems, specifically the recognition of road signs, traffic lights, the lane, pedestrians, and other general road users. AI is similarly also used for monitoring with the assistance of cameras, for example to recognize exceptional situations in advance.
Significance of AI Significance of AI These problems could not be technically solved without AI algorithms. A general rule of thumb for the applications of AI is: If the problem can be easily solved by classic methods, these are to be generally preferred. AI is exciting for applications in which the path to the solution cannot be described by a few simple rules as an algorithm.
Intelligent agents AI systems are often based on the underlying concept of an "intelligent agent" which on account of its own knowledge appears in the position to act rationally in a given context and therefore is perceived
by external human observers to be intel : ligent. This concept of the attribution of intelligence by an external observer on account of actions that suggest intelligent knowledge processing was formulated by A. Newell in 1980 .
world sufficient semantic understanding. Added to this is the ability to act, i.e., turn what has been learned and the object of planning into reality.
The abilities of learning, representing the content and its further processing will be addressed in the following. To conclude, aspects of the security of AI systems will be addressed.
Example Can a Bosch hammer or a Bosch orbital sander be seen in a photo? We could solve this task for example with machine learning. The quantity X is in this case photos in which either a Bosch hammer or an orbital sander can be seen. The quantity Y of possible annotations is here "Bosch hammer" and "orbital sander".
Now we have in front of us a stack of photos, each with a "Post it" note with the text . With the aid of these learning examples we train the algorithm to solve the problem, given a new image we see a Bosch hammer or orbital sander.
The learning success can be easily measured here: we feed the algorithm a new image xT. We obtain a prediction h are always different, the algorithm never makes a correct prediction. If on the other hand the probability is zero, the learning was successful and the learning algorithm always produces a correct prediction.
Learning or training in the case of machine learning incidentally almost always means the following when put simply: Using data the learning process sets its parameters in such a way that there will be a correct prediction as often as possible. Learning strategies Supervised learning Supervised learning The learning approach outlined above in which preclassified examples are used for learning is called "supervised learning". When the correctly annotated data are available, this is a highly efficient learning process. The effort involved in providing the data, annotating, and ensuring the correct annotation is however very high. Unsupervised learning Unsupervised learning A fundamentally different learning strategy is "unsupervised learning". Here objects are with regard to their similarity categorized in a target concept and appropriate clusters are created. In each case only one example as typical as possible is required as well as one metric and the objects are grouped and categorized in relation to their similarity by the target object.
Reinforcement learning Reinforcement learning A further learning strategy is "reinforcement learning", in which an algorithm as with unsupervised learning receives non annotated training examples and is to create a model. The modeling is to be steered in the desired direction by means of positive and negative feedback. This is almost a further development of the concept of evolutionary algorithms which modify themselves and in which the selection is controlled by means of fitness functions.
Important algorithms: Linear regression Linear regression A very simple algorithm which however clearly illustrates machine learning is linear regression. Let us take for example some one dimensional measured values, i.e., tuples at input variable x and measured value y.
such parallel neurons forms the input of a further layer of neurons, thereby creating connections within a network. The last layer constitutes the output of the network. The size and structure of a network are dependent on the volume of training data and the complexity of the input values. Networks with up to 100 layers and over 100 million weights are used in image processing. A network however does not get "bigger" through learning.
This optimization process is very computation intensive and was only made possible by new processor technologies, such as for example current generation graphics cards.
Applications Specifically, ANNs are used for example to classify objects, i.e., to estimate which category is involved for a given example. The last layer supplies a value as the output, for example 0 for Bosch hammer and 1 for orbital sander. Now many examples are presented to the network and the weights are adjusted in such a way that the prediction of the learning process is always as correct as possible . The entire learning process of the ANN is also called "deep learning".
So called generative models constitute a second application aside from the classification of objects. Instead of predicting the class Bosch hammer or orbital sander in an image, the ANN is used to generate new data. Thus, the network could generate for example a new image, which constitutes a mixture of Bosch hammer and orbital sander. However, these tasks require much more complicated processes to adjust the weights of the ANN.
Representation  of information The representation of perceptions or experience content and subsequent further processing is one of the essential basic prerequisites for AI.
The manner of further processing is determinant for the appropriate form of representation. In those areas of AI which were greatly characterized by expert systems and the structuring of knowledge into easily communicable logical structures "knowledge representation" was practically synonymous with representation in logical formalisms together with an ontology, i.e., a systematic compilation of objects and their systematic correlation in a field of application which facilitated a semantic interpretation of the formulas. Special neural networks, autoencoders, can be used to represent complex correlations. These are trained to learn an efficient representation for data and thus also important characteristics . Significant application possibilities can be found in the compact representation of words with their context by "word embedding" in speech processing.
has the task of creating a specific distri : bution of data. The discriminator attempts to distinguish these generated data from those of a "real" distribution which is present in the field of application. The aim of the generator is therefore to create such data which the discriminator evaluates as "real". GANs are used in a wide range of applications, from the creation of photo realistic images to movement modeling in video sequences.
Planning Significance of planning Behavior that seems rational or intelligent often requires a decision to be made or an action to be performed "now" in order to achieve an objective only very much later in the future. Many extreme challenging AI tasks have such a characteristic.
make a move in each round in order to win the game at some stage in the future. During each move they must estimate how the move will influence the game in the long term.
ferent levels. For instance, they must find a route to the destination. This is called route planning. However, the vehicles must also plan their motion, particularly the control commands such as steering angle or acceleration, in such a way that they reach their destination without collisions, even when other vehicles are moving in the same environment. This is called motion or behavior planning.
A prerequisite for planning is having an understanding of how an action will influence the future. The ability to plan also presupposes that an AI agent can answer the questions "What if..." or "What does the world look like after this action?" More formally the agent requires a model of the environment. In a game the model is given by the game mechanism and the rules. In the navigation of an autonomous vehicle a model is obtained from the physics of the vehicle and the from the environment with all the obstacles.
the board. On a vehicle steering angle : and acceleration can be continuously adjusted, which results in a practically infinite sphere of action. In the case of very large spheres of state and action, therefore, sampling based methods are often used in the search in which actions are randomly selected and evaluated after a special statistical distribution.
Problem when planning Problem when planning Planning is made more difficult by the fact that the future for the most part cannot be predicted accurately. In games the future always depends on the opponent's moves. Autonomous vehicles must react to other road users. Unlike the case with route planning, a clear route leading to the destination cannot therefore be found. Rather a decision must depict and react to the "anticipated" future.
Computing time and computing capacity Computing time and computing capacity A huge challenge in many planning problems is the required computing time and computing capacity. In a game like chess or Go a player game situation, nevertheless to develop a plan or a strategy very quickly and to make sensible moves.
New planning New planning Another trick to generate rational behavior is new planning. Instead of planning a complete route to the destination every time, a shorter plan is calculated. From this plan this first action is performed and a new planning is started. This process can be extremely efficient because on the one hand the computing time can be significantly reduced and on the other hand the system can also easily react to changes in the environment thanks to the continuous new planning. However, such an approach sets new challenges with regard to the completeness and optimality of the algorithms.
Intelligence Planning is a classic and still very important sub area of AI. The ability of an AI agent to plan and have strategic foresight is often, when viewed from the outside, perceived to be intelligence.
IT security of AI systems: Comparison of an AI system with  a classic program An AI system differs from a classic computer program in that in the latter there is a marked separation between the application logic encoded in algorithms and the data used. The data flow is predefined by the structure of the algorithm. In AI systems the structure of a neural network for example is encoded in a specific algorithm. However, the weights of the network and consequently also the data flow through the system are dependent on the data. There is therefore a much closer correlation between data and system behavior than in conventional systems.
Manipulation possibilities The software and the executable code of an AI system are subject to the same extent to all the risks and dangers of manipulation as any other software system that is run as an application on a computer system. In the IT environment security is usually considered from the perspectives of confidentiality, integrity, and availability. With regard to AI systems and intelligent agents system integrity plays a specific role because the intended functioning of a system is referenced with this term.
Manipulation of the control flow Manipulation of the control flow "Hacking" systems has this very things as its object, namely the takeover and "external control" of a system through manipulation of the control flow. Instead of processing the original program commands, a system is made to execute any other code. In other words, the original algorithm is replaced by a different one. A hacker takes advantage of weaknesses in the system design, for example missing or insufficient input validation, thereby provokes errors in the system access, and "deposits" return addresses to code fragments which they have implanted.
Data poisoning Data poisoning In an AI system there are furthermore additional possible ways to influence how the system works. Because adaptive systems are not programmed in the conventional sense but instead trained, system behavior can be altered by manipulating data from which the systems learn. This is called data poisoning.
In applications in which a system learns continuously there is a high degree of vulnerability to this type of attack. A system could alter its fundamental behavior in response to new data. For this reason, in the case of safety critical requirements the weights of a network are "frozen" to prevent this. In addition, the perception of the systems can be disrupted by "adversarial attacks". This may result in a highly automated vehicle failing to recognize a traffic scene correctly and consequently not reacting appropriately.
bilities remaining, this is not the case with AI systems. Full input validation cannot be provided in open application domains. It is therefore appropriate in AI systems, aside from observing the fundamental principles of secure system development in the system architecture, to provide further functionalities that actively observe, protect and stabilize system behavior. This involves firstly the ability of a system to detect connected sequences of actions and to assign them to typical contexts and secondly the capacity to perceive itself in the time context and to compare current behavior with earlier behavior.
 "A system is a set of interconnected components that has an expected behavior observed at the interface with its environment". See: J. Saltzer, F. Kaashoek: Principles of Computer System Design, Morgan Kaufman. Boston 2009, p. 8.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.07800, 2017. D. Silver et al. "Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search" Nature, 529, pp. 484 489 .
Material parameters: Selecting material for a specific use is based on material parameters that describe the material properties. This process distinguishes between the physical material parameters, which result from the atomic structure, and the mechanicaltechnological material parameters, which are affected by manufacturing processes, for example.
Physical material parameters Density Density Density r is the ratio of the mass to the volume of a specific amount of substance . The unit of measurement is kg/m3.
Heat of fusion Heat of fusion The specific heat of fusion of a solid is the quantity of heat required to evaporate a liquid at constant boiling temperature. It is very pressure sensitive. The unit of measurement is kJ/kg.
Thermal conductivity Thermal conductivity Thermal conductivity is the quantity of heat that flows through a material sample with a defined surface and density due to temperature difference. In the case of liquids and gases .
Electric conductivity Electric conductivity Electric conductivity describes the physical property of a material to conduct electric current. According to the Wiedemann Franz law, it is almost proportional to thermal conductivity. The unit of measurement is S/m .
The cubic coefficient of thermal expansion is defined in a similar manner. The coefficient of volume expansion for gases is roughly 1/273 K 1; For solids, it is roughly three times as large as the coefficient of linear expansion.
Heat capacity Heat capacity The specific heat capacity  is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of a substance. It is dependent on temperature.
In the case of gases, we distinguish  between specific heat capacity at constant pressure and at constant volume .
Depending on the application in which the magnetic material is used, there are roughly 15 types of permeability. These are defined according to modulation range and type of loading . The most important parameters are listed below.
Temperature coefficient  Temperature coefficient  of magnetic polarization of magnetic polarization The temperature coefficient of the magnetic polarization TK indicates the relative change in saturation polarization as temperature changes, it is given in percent per kelvin.
Temperature coefficient  Temperature coefficient  of coercive field strength of coercive field strength The temperature coefficient of the coercive field strength TK indicates the relative change in coercive field strength as temperature changes, it is given in percent per kelvin.
Curie point Curie point The Curie point .
UAE1243E T A/cm  40 40 Hc Br 2 Hc 3 1 0 80  2.0 0 0.5  1.0  1.5  80 Magnetic field strength H Magnetic flux density B 2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5
Mechanical technological : material parameters Modulus of elasticity Modulus of elasticity The modulus of elasticity . The unit of measurement is MPa. Examples of typical e moduli are specified in table 1.
Poisson's ratio Poisson's ratio The dimensionless Poisson's ratio is the proportionality factor between the longitudinal strain of a body under tension or compressive stress and the resulting transverse strain. Typical values are specified in table 1.
Yield point Yield point The yield strength . The unit of measurement is MPa.
0.2 0.2 % yield strength yield strength The 0.2 % yield strength strain of 0.2 % in a material. The unit of measurement is MPa.
Elongation at fracture: Elongation at fracture The elongation at fracture A is a dimension for the ductility of a material. It indicates the lasting extension of a tensile specimen after the fracture relative to the initial length, specified in percent.
Fracture contraction Fracture contraction The fracture contraction Z, like the elongation at fracture, is a dimension for the ductility of a material. It indicates in percent the change in crosssectional area relative to the initial crosssection of a tensile specimen.
Uniform strain Uniform strain The uniform strain Ag indicates the change in length in percent at which a tensile specimen goes through a plastic deformation without necking. For ductile materials, necking is caused on the specimen . These are usually carried out on electromechanical or electrohydraulic testing machines in the frequency range of 10 to 1,000 Hz.
sion fatigue stress factor identifies the ratio of vibration resistance to tensile strength . For metals with a face centered cubic crystal lattice, such as austenitic steel or aluminum, there is no fatigue limit since the stressability decreases when the stress duration increases.
Knowing the vibration resistance parameters is absolutely necessary for designing parts and components in mechanical engineering, since purely static stress is rare.
Fatigue strength  Fatigue strength  under reversed bending stress under reversed bending stress Fatigue strength under reversed bending stress identifies the stress in MPa that a material can withstand without breaking during cyclical bending stress .
Aluminum, wrought and casting materials 0.30 Cast iron with flake graphite 0.34 Stainless steel 0.40 Structural steel,  tempering steel, etc.
SAE1202 1E Short time strength Low cycle fatigue High cycle fatigue Wohler curve 104 107 Rm MPa Number of load cycles N  Sa,D
Hardness: Hardness The hardness of a material identifies its resistance to the penetration of a body. Various methods for determining hardness are listed in the chapter "Heat treatment of metallic materials".
Fracture toughness Fracture toughness The fracture toughness is the resistance of a material to the spread of cracks. The critical stress intensity factor KIc is usually used as a characteristic of this. If KIc is known, the critical fracture load can be determined from crack length, or the critical crack length can be determined from the given external stress value.
Special characteristics  for sintered material Radial crushing strength Radial crushing strength The radial crushing strength is a strength parameter which is specified in particular for sintered friction bearings. This is determined by buckling a hollow cylinder during the pressure test.
Porosity Porosity The porosity is a dimensionless characteristic for sintered metals, particularly friction bearings. It describes the portion of part volume that consists of cavities and is not filled with actual material. Compressive yield point Compressive yield point Comparable to the yield strength in the tensile test, the compressive yield point is added in the pressure test as a material characteristic . This identifies the stress starting at which an irreversible plastic deformation occurs in the material.
Special characteristics for springs Bending stress Bending stress Bending stress occurs when stress is put on torsion springs. The maximum bending stress here should not exceed 0.7 Rm.
Shear stress Shear stress Shear stress occurs in the material when stress is put on pressure and tension springs. The maximum shear stress should not exceed 0.5 Rm. Here, the shear stress is dependent on the coil diameter of the spring, spring force and wire diameter. The difference between maximum stress and minimum stress is also called stress range.
 DIN EN ISO 6892 1:2017 02: Metallic materials Tensile testing Part 1: Method of test at room temperature ; German version EN ISO 6892 1:2016.
. 3rd Edition, Springer Verlag, 2007.
 S. Suresh: Fatigue of Materials. 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
1) At 1.013 bar.  2) At 20 degC. DH of chemical elements at 27 degC At 0 to 100 degC.
1) At 1.013 bar. : 2) At 20 degC. DH of chemical elements at 27 degC At 0 to 100 degC.
3) At melting temperature and 1.013 bar.  4) At boiling temperature and 1.013 bar.  5) At 0 degC.   6) Setting temperature 0 degC.
Material group Material type  Abbreviation  Example E modulus  Cast iron and  malleable cast iron Cast iron with lamellar graphite EN GJL 200 80 to 140 Cast iron with spheroid graphite EN GJS 400 160 to 180 White malleable cast iron EN GJMW 450 175 to 195 Black malleable cast iron EN GJMB 450 175 to 195 Cast steel Cast steel for general use GE300 210 Steel Unalloyed steels C60 210 Low alloy steels 42CrMoS4 210 Austenitic steels X5CrNi18 10 >= 190 High alloy tool steels HS 6 5 4 <= 230 Wrought copper alloys High conductivity copper Cu ETP 110 to 130 Brass CuZn30 115 Nickel silver CuNi18Zn20 135 Tin bronze CuSn6 100 to 120 Casting copper alloys Tin cast bronze CuSn10 C 100 Red brass CuSn7Zn4Pb7 C 100 Aluminum alloys Wrought aluminum alloy EN AW AlSi1MgMn 65 to 75 Casting aluminum alloy EN AC AlSi12Cu1 65 to 80 Magnesium alloys Wrought magnesium alloy MgAl6Zn 40 to 45 Cast magnesium alloy EN MCMgAl9Zn1 40 to 45 Titanium alloys Wrought titanium alloy TiAl6V4 110 Tin alloys Cast tin alloys for composite slide bearings SnSb12Cu6Pb 30 Zinc alloys Die cast zinc alloy GD ZnAl4Cu1 70
Metallic materials: The metals generally have a crystalline structure. Their atoms are arranged in a regular crystal lattice. The valence electrons of the atoms are not bound to a specific atom, but are able to move freely within the metal lattice a metallic bond is present. This special metal lattice structure explains the characteristic properties of metals: the ductility and resulting high level of formability, the high electric conductivity, the high level of thermal conductivity, the low light transmission and the great optical reflective ability .
The metallic materials used most often in technical applications include ferrous material. Iron base alloys are primarily used for this. An alloy is defined as a metallic material that consists of at least two chemical elements.
The ferrous materials are divided into groups for steels and cast iron materials. The main difference between the two groups is carbon content. The carbon content of steel is generally less than 2 % and over 2 % for cast iron .
Steels Structural compositions of steels Structural compositions of steels The majority of steels primarily consists of iron and other property determining  alloying elements such as chrome, nickel, vanadium, molybdenum and titanium.
The most important alloying element is carbon, which is diffused in the iron lattice and present as iron carbide . The most important phases are described below.
Ferrite The ferritic structure exhibits a bodycentered cubic atomic arrangement. It is soft, easily formable and ferromagnetic .
723 degC 1,147 degC 4.3 4 5 6 Mass fraction 600 800 1,000 1,200 911 degC 1,536 degC 1,493 degC 1,400 1,600 degC Pearlite SAE1232 2E
Pearlite : Pearlite has a lamellar iron carbon structure, consisting of alternating associated areas of iron carbide . The pearlitic structure exhibits high strength.
Increasing the carbon content further results in the increased formation of iron carbide, which tends to separate out at the grain boundaries.
Austenite If a steel is heated .
Structural steel This is a simple steel that can usually be welded or machined easily. It is used in large quantities in general mechanical engineering and civil engineering and is reasonably priced .
Free cutting steel This steel typically features high sulfur content, which causes short chips to form when machining .
Tool steel This is the umbrella term for a type of steel used for tools and molds. Depending on the application, it can feature high tensile strength, thermal stability, viscosity or  corrosion resistance. This steel type can be classified as a cold work steel , particularly for machining tools such as drills and milling cutters.
Tempering steel This type of steel is particularly well suited for quench and draw heat treatment .
Table 2: Properties and typical applications for steels: Material  group Example materials Surface hardness Core hardness Properties Typical applications Case hardening steel  90MnCrV8 60 to 64 HRC High dimensional stability,  great edge retention and toughness.
Reamers,  woodworking tools, thread  cutters X210Cr12 60 to 64 HRC Highly  wear resistant,  great dimensional stability, high hardening  properties Cutting and  punching tools, broaching tools,  flange rollers,  cold extrusion tools Hot work steel  X20Cr13 40 HRC Usable up to 550 degC, ferromagnetic,  high resistance to wear Pump parts,  piston rods,  nozzle needles, ship propellers X90Cr MoV18 >=57 HRC Good chemical resistance,  resistance to wear and polishing  properties Cutting tools, ball bearings
Table 3: Properties and typical applications for steels: Material group Example materials Tensile strength  Properties Typical application examples Hot galvanized strip/ sheet DX53D <= 380 <= 260 >= 30  >= 190 Good deep drawing capability, hot galvanized, higher strength Automotive sheet metal parts e. g.
Most frequently used corrosion resistant steel, good weldability, good deep draw  and polishing capability,  non magnetic Chemical apparatus  engineering,  architecture, household objects Cold strip  >= 130 Good deep draw properties Automotive sheet metal parts e. g.
Case hardening steel: These steels feature a low carbon content . Applications include gear wheels and piston pins. Unlike nitriding, case hardening causes greater delays due to the martensitic hardening.
Nitriding steel This steel forms a very hard and wearresistant surface layer .
Cast iron materials Cast iron is defined as an iron based alloy with a carbon content greater than approximately 2 %. The cast iron designation derives from these alloys' particularly high level of castability. One reason for this is the significantly lower melting temperature in comparison to steel .
Types of cast iron: Types of cast iron The slow cooling during casting results in carbon mostly being present as graphite, typically in a ferritic pearlitic matrix. Gray cast iron Depending on the formation of the graphite in layers or spheroids, the cast iron is referred to as either gray cast iron with lamellar graphite . The spheroid formation of the graphite is controlled in this process by treating the molten metal accordingly, such as with calcium. GJS features higher strength and better formability than GJL. Gray cast iron with vermicular graphite represents the middle ground between these two alloy types, both in terms of both graphite formation as well as properties.
Malleable cast iron Along with these three types, the structure can also be affected by heat treatment .
Cast steel Cast steel is used for particularly highly stressed, weldable castings. In comparison to simple cast iron with lamellar graphite, castability is significantly worse while casting temperature and shrinkage are considerably higher.
Nonferrous metals Along with the steels, some nonferrous metals .
through 9 give an overview of typical properties and applications of some materials. Aluminum alloys In aluminum alloys, adding alloying elements primarily aims to improve mechanical properties. For example, adding zinc or copper makes heat treatment possible, which results in high strength.
Copper alloys Alloying zinc to copper forms brass are frequently used for plug contacts.
Cold workable, non tarnishing, good spring properties Relay springs, plugs Tin bronze CuSn6 R470 > 470 350 190 Good coldworkability, good strength properties, good hardening properties, good wear and corrosion resistance,  solderable Springs,  metal hoses,  general machine and apparatus engineering
Table 7: Properties and typical applications for NF wrought alloys: Material group Typical materials Tensile strength  Properties Application examples Pure aluminum EN  AW Al99,5 O 65 20 40 High conductivity,  ductile,  food grade Apparatus and tank engineering, deep drawn parts Selfhardening aluminum alloy EN  AW AlMg2Mn0,8 H111 190 80 90 Seawater resistant, easily weldable Automotive and ship engineering Heattreatable  aluminum alloy EN  AW AlSi1MgMn  T6 310 260 90 Artificially aged, good combination of strength, corrosion resistance Most frequent ly used heat treatable aluminum alloy, profiles, vehicle frames, automobile transverse links Heatresistant aluminum alloy EN  AW AlCu4MgSi  DF 240 140 70 Good processibility, low cost Intake manifolds, transmission housings
Magnesium At a density of approximately 1.75 g/cm3, magnesium is significantly lighter than aluminum. The low melting temperature makes it particularly well suited for castings. Typical applications in automotive engineering include car wheel rims, housing units and profiles.
Titanium Hard to machine titanium alloys feature great corrosion resistance and a high level of thermal stability. Due to the favorable ratio of density and strength, these alloys lend themselves well to the aviation industry due to biocompatibility.
Sintered metals Metal powder sintering Metal powder sintering Sintered metals are generally manufactured using near net shape pressing of metal powders. This allows complicated shapes to be made from sintered metals at low costs, ready to install immediately or only requiring little finishing. After nearnet shape pressing the metal powder, a permanent connection between the grains is established by a running diffusion process at temperatures between 60 and 80 % of the melting temperature. Metal injection molding Metal injection molding During MIM , a process variant of sintering, a component is formed by injection molding metal powder and plastic compounds. After removing lubricants and binders with chemicals or heat, the molded articles retain their characteristic properties just like during metal powder sintering.
Low  temperature coefficient, high oxidation  stability Resistors,  potentiometer,  heating  filament Cast tin bronze CuSn10 C GS 250 160 90 Good corrosion,  resistance to wear Fittings,  pump  housings Red brass CuSn7Zn4Pb7C GZ 260 150 80 Seawater  resistant,  good  machinability,  limp home characteristics Friction  bearings,  bushings ________________________________ References for metallic materials References for metallic materials DIN 30910 3: Sintered metal materials Sintered material specifications Part 3: Materials for bearings and structural parts with bearing properties.
Table 10: Materials for bearings and structural parts with bearing properties1: Permissible ranges Representative examples Material Material code SintDensity r g/cm3 Chemical composition in % by mass Percent Radial breaking strength K 2) N/mm2 Hardness HB Density r g/cm3 Chemical composition in % by mass Percent Radial breaking strength K 2) N/mm2 Compressive yield point dd 0.2 N/mm2 Hardness HB 2) Thermal conductivity l W/mK Sintered iron A 00 B 00 C 00 5.6 to 6.0 6.0 to 6.4 6.4 to 6.8 < 0.3 C; < 1.0 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 150 > 180 > 220 > 25 > 30 > 40 5.9 6.3 6.7 < 0.2 others; rest Fe 160 190 230 130 160 180 30 40 50 37 43 48 Sintered steel containing Cu A 10 B 10 C 10 5.6 to 6.0 6.0 to 6.4 6.4 to 6.8 < 0.3 C; 1 to 5 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 160 > 190 > 230 > 35 > 40 > 55 5.9 6.3 6.7 2.0 Cu; < 0.2 others; rest Fe 170 200 240 150 170 200 40 50 65 36 37 42 Sintered steel containing  Cu and C B 11 6.0 to 6.4 0.4 to 1.5 C; 1 to 5 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 270 > 70 6.3 0.6 C; 2.0 Cu; < 0.2 others; rest Fe 280 160 80 28 Sintered steel containing higher Cu A 20 B 20 5.8 to 6.2 6.2 to 6.6 < 0.3 C; 15 to 25 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 180 > 200 > 30 > 45 6.0 6.4 20 Cu; < 0.2 others; rest Fe 200 220 140 160 40 50 41 47 Sintered steel containing higher Cu and C A 22 B 22 5.5 to 6.0 6.0 to 6.5 0.5 to 3.0 C; 15 to 25 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 120 > 140 > 20 > 25 5.7 6.1 2.0 C 3); 20 Cu; < 0.2 others; rest Fe 125 145 100 120 25 30 30 37 Sintered bronze A 50 B 50 C 50 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 7.2 to 7.7 < 0.2 C; 9 to 11 Sn; < 2 others; rest Cu > 120 > 170 > 200 > 25 > 30 > 35 6.6 7.0 7.4 10 Sn; < 0.2 others; rest Cu 140 180 210 100 130 160 30 35 45 27 32 37 Sintered bronze graphitic 4) A 51 B 51 C 51 6.0 to 6.5 6.5 to 7.0 7.0 to 7.5 0.5 to 3.0 C; 9 to 11 Sn; < 2 others; rest Cu > 100 > 150 > 170 > 20 > 25 > 30 6.3 6.7 7.1 1.5 C 4); 10 Sn; < 0.2 others; rest Cu 120 155 175 80 100 120 20 30 35 20 26 32 1 According to "Material Specification Sheets for Sintered Metals": DIN 30910 3, 2004 edition .  2 Measured on calibrated bearings 10/16 O 10.   3 C is primarily present as free graphite.  4 C is present as free graphite.
Table 11: Sintered metals for structural parts1: Permissible ranges Representative examples Material Material code SintDensity r g/cm3 Chemical composition in % by mass Percent Hardness HB Density r g/cm3 Chemical composition in % by mass Percent Tensile strength Rm N/mm2 Yield point Rp 0.1 N/mm2 Elongation at break A Percent Hardness HB Emodule E 103 N/mm2 Sintered iron C 00 D 00 E 00 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 > 7.2 < 0.3 C; < 1.0 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 35 > 45 > 60 6.6 6.9 7.3 < 0.5 others; rest Fe 120 170 240 60 80 120 3 8 14 40 50 60 100 130 160 Sintered steel containing C C 01 D 01 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 0.3 to 0.9 C; < 1.0 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 70 > 90 6.6 6.9 0.5 C; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 240 300 170 200 2 2 75 90 100 130 Sintered steel containing Cu C 10 D 10 E 10 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 > 7.2 < 0.3 C; 1 to 5 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 40 > 50 > 80 6.6 6.9 7.3 1.5 Cu; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 200 250 340 140 180 240 2 3 5 55 80 110 100 130 160 Sintered steel containing Cu and C C 11 D 11 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 0.4 to 1.5 C; 1 to 5 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 80 > 95 6.6 6.9 0.6 C; 1.5 Cu; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 390 460 290 370 1 2 115 130 100 130 C 21 6.4 to 6.8 0.4 to 1.5 C; 5 to 10 Cu; < 2 others; rest Fe > 105 6.6 0.8 C; 6 Cu; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 470 360 <1 140 100 Sintered steel containing Cu, Ni and Mo C 30 D 30 E 30 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 > 7.2 < 0.3 C; 1 to 5 Cu; 1 to 5 Ni; < 0.6 Mo; < 2 others; rest Fe > 55 > 60 > 90 6.6 6.9 7.3 0.3 C; 1.5 Cu; 4.0 Ni; 0.5 Mo; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 360 460 570 290 330 390 2 2 4 100 125 160 100 130 160 Sintered steel Cu, Ni and Mo C 31 D 31 E 31 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 > 7.2 < 0.3 C; < 3.0 Cu; < 5.0 Ni; 0.6 to 2 Mo; < 2 others; rest Fe > 50 > 60 > 90 6.6 6.9 7.3 0.2 C; 2.0 Ni; 1.5 Mo; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 320 380 460 220 260 320 1 2 3 100 120 150 100 130 160 Sintered steel contains  Mo and C C 32 D 32 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 < 0.3 to 0.9 C; < 3.0 Cu; < 5.0 Ni; 0.6 to 2 Mo; < 2 others; rest Fe > 55 > 60 6.6 6.9 0.6 C; 2.0 Cu; 1.5 Mo; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 400 520 370 480 <1 1 140 180 100 130 Sintered steel containing P C 35 D 35 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 < 0.3 C; < 1 Cu; 0.3 to 0.6 P; < 2 others; rest Fe > 70 > 80 6.6 6.9 0.45 P; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 290 310 180 210 9 10 80 85 100 130 Sintered steel containing Cu and P C 36 D 36 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 < 0.3 C; 1 to 5 Cu; 0.3 to 0.6 P; < 2 others; rest Fe > 80 > 90 6.6 6.9 2.0 Cu; 0.45 P; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 330 350 270 300 4 5 90 95 100 130
Table 11 : Sintered metals for structural parts1: Permissible ranges Representative examples Material Material code SintDensity r g/cm3 Chemical composition in % by mass Percent Hardness HB Density r g/cm3 Chemical composition in % by mass Percent Tensile strength Rm N/mm2 Yield point Rp 0.1 N/mm2 Elongation at break A % Hardness HB Emodule E 103 N/mm2 Sintered steel containing Cu, Ni, Mo and C C 39 D 39 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 0.3 to 0.9 C; 1 to 3 Cu; 1 to 5 Ni; < 0.6 Mo; < 2 others; rest Fe > 90 > 120 6.6 6.9 0.5 C; 1.5 Cu; 4.0 Ni; 0.5 Mo; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 480 560 350 380 1 2 140 160 100 130 Stainless sintered steel AISI 316 C 40 D 40 6.4 to 6.8 6.8 to 7.2 < 0.08 C; 10 to 14 Ni; 2 to 4 Mo; 16 to 19 Cr; < 2 others; rest Fe > 95 > 125 6.6 6.9 0.06 C; 13 Ni; 2.5 Mo; 18 Cr; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 330 400 250 320 1 2 110 135 100 130 AISI 430 C 42 6.4 to 6.8 < 0.08 C; 16 to 19 Cr; < 2 others; rest Fe > 140 6.6 0.06 C; 18 Cr; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 420 330 1 170 100 AISI 410 C 43 6.4 to 6.8 < 0.3 C; 11 to 13 Cr; < 2 others; rest Fe > 165 6.6 0.2 C; 13 Cr; < 0.5 others; rest Fe 510 370 1 180 100 Sintered bronze C 50 D 50 7.2 to 7.7 7.7 to 8.1 9 to 11 Sn; < 2 others; rest Cu > 35 > 45 7.4 7.9 10 Sn; < 0.5 others; rest Cu 150 220 90 120 4 6 40 55 50 70 Sintered aluminum     AlCuMgSi     AlSiMgCu     AlZnMgCu E 73 F 75 F 77 2.55 to 2.65 2.60 to 2.66 2.74 to 2.78 4 to 6 Cu; < 1 Mg; < 1 Si; < 2 other; rest Al.
> 55 > 70 > 90 2.58 2 2.58 3 2.63 2 2.63 3 2.78 2 2.78 3 4.5 Cu; 0.6 Mg; 0.7 Si; < 0.5 other; rest Al.
190 4 230 4 1 < 0.5 < 0.5 < 0.5 3 1.5 65 90 90 125 100 155 55 5 55 5 78 5 78 5 68 5 68 5 1 According to "Material Specification Sheets for Sintered Metals": DIN 30910 4, 2010 edition . 2 T1a sintered state and stored at room temperature for at least five days.   3 T6 solution annealed and artificially aged. 4 Yield strength Rp0.2.  5 Determining the E modulus using ultrasound. n.c. not calculated.
EN metallurgy standards: Standardization of steels Steel is defined as an iron alloy, usually with a carbon content of <= 2 %. Ferrous materials with a higher carbon content are usually classified as cast iron. Steels are classified in three classes, "unalloyed steels", "stainless steels" and "other alloyed steels".
Unalloyed steels Unalloyed steels Unalloyed steels that do not reach the  defined minimum alloying element content are then divided into unalloyed high grade steels and unalloyed stainless steels. For unalloyed high grade steels, defined requirements apply, such as those regarding toughness and malleability.
Unalloyed stainless steels feature a higher degree of purity and, therefore, improved properties such as high yield strength, hardenability, good toughness and weldability. They are usually intended for quenching and drawing or for surface hardening.
Stainless steels Stainless steels Stainless steels feature a chrome content of at least 10.5 percent by mass and a carbon content of less than 1.2 percent by mass. They are subdivided further by nickel content and by the main properties, including corrosion resistance, heat resistance and temperature stability.
Other alloyed steels Other alloyed steels These include steels with requirements in regards to aspects such as toughness, particle size or malleability. They are usually not intended for quenching and drawing or surface hardening. A distinction is made between alloyed high grade steels and alloyed stainless steels.
Designation system for steels  Designation system for steels  with material abbreviations with material abbreviations  The material abbreviations for steels are divided into two groups.
Abbreviated names of Group 1 These material abbreviations include notes on use and mechanical or physical properties. The prefix G indicates that it involves a cast steel material: S, GS For general steel construction, P, GP  For pressure vessel  construction, L  For pipeline construction, E  Engineering steels, B  Concrete reinforcing steels, Y  Prestressing steels, R  Rail steels, H  Flat products made of higherstrength steels for cold forming, D  Flat products for cold forming, T  Packaging steel sheet and strip, M  Electrical steel sheet and strip.
Examples: S235JR S  Generally for steel construction, 235  Yield strength in MPa, JR  Notch impact work 27 J at 20 degC.
Abbreviated names of Group 2 These material abbreviations contain references to the chemical composition. The prefix G indicates that this is a cast steel material: C, GC Unalloyed steels , X, GX  High alloyed steels, PM  Powder metallurgy, HS High speed steel.
Examples:: C85S C  Unalloyed steel , 85  0.01 times the C content, i. e. 0.85 % C, S  For springs.
42CrMo4 42  Low alloyed steel .
X5CrNi18 10 X  High alloyed steel, 5  0.05 % carbon, 18  18 % Cr, 10  10 % Ni.
HS 7 4 2 5 HS  High speed steel  Percentage of alloyed constituents in whole percentages in the order of tungsten molybdenum vanadium cobalt: 7  7 % tungsten, 4  4 % molybdenum, 2  2 % vanadium, 5  5 % cobalt.
Material major group number: 0  Pig iron, ferro alloys, 1  Steel, 2  Nonferrous heavy metals, 3  Light metals, 4 to 8  Non metallic materials, 9  Unassigned for internal use.
Steel group number : 00  Unalloyed ordinary low carbon steels, 01 to 07 Unalloyed high grade steels, 10 to 18 Unalloyed stainless steels, 40 to 49  Chemically stable alloying steels, 20 to 29 Alloying tool steels.
Example: 1.4301  1  Steel, 43  Stainless steel,  with more than 2.5 % Ni,  without any Mo, Nb or Ti, 01  Count number.
Designation system for cast iron : Designation system for cast iron  with abbreviations with abbreviations . The character for denoting the graphite structure is in the third position: L  Lamellar, S  Spheroidal, M  Temper carbon, V  Vermicular, N  Graphite free, ledeburitic cast chilled iron, Y  Special structure.
Notes on the microstructure and macrostructure can be placed at position 4 if necessary, such as : A  Austenite, F  Ferrite, Q  Quenched.
The fifth position contains information on tensile strength, impact energy with test temperature or for hardness. Alternatively, the fifth position can specify the chemical composition.
EN GJS SiMo30 8 EN European standard, GJ  Cast iron, S  Spheroidal graphite, Si  Silicon content 3 %, Mo  Molybdenum content 0.8 %.
Designation system for cast iron  Designation system for cast iron  with material numbers with material numbers The designation consists of a total of six positions. The first and second positions contain "5." followed by information on the graphite structure at the third position: 1  Lamellar, 2  Vermicular, 3  Spheroidal, 4  Temper carbon.
Nonferrous metal alloys As for ferrous materials, the EN standard also features two options for describing and identifying each nonferrous metals  and the second uses a numerical designation system.
Unlike steels, NF metals are each identified with their own numerical designation system. Thus, the different properties and requirements of, for example, aluminum, copper or zinc alloys are better taken into account.
Designation system for NF metals  Designation system for NF metals  with abbreviation with abbreviation The EN standard denotes nonferrous metals according to the following basic system: Example: EN AW Al Si1MgMn T6 EN European standard, Code letter for metal: A  Aluminum, C  Copper, M  Magnesium.
The system lists the alloy metals in order of base metal with falling percentages. Special numerical Special numerical designation system  designation system  for aluminum .
Example 1: EN AW 6082 T6 EN European standard, AW  Wrought aluminum alloy, 6   Indicator 6 for alloy group  .
Example 2: EN AC 45200 EN European standard, AC  Casting aluminum alloy, 45  AlSi5Cu alloy group, 200  Number for individual alloy .
Code numbers for the alloy groups: 1  Pure aluminum, 2  With copper, 3  With manganese, 4  With silicon, 5  With magnesium, 6  With magnesium silicon, 7  With zinc, 8  Other.
Material conditions , T6  Solution annealed  and artificially aged.
 DIN EN 573 1: Aluminium and aluminium alloys Chemical composition and form of wrought products Part 1: Numerical designation system.
Magnetic materials: Materials which have ferromagnetic or  ferrimagnetic properties are called magnetic materials and belong to one of two groups: metals .
In addition to ferromagnets and ferrimagnets, diamagnetic, paramagnetic, and antiferromagnetic materials also exist. They differ from each other in terms of their permeability m, or the temperature dependence of their susceptibility k. This variable gives the ratio of the magnetization of a substance to the magnetic field strength or excitation.
The saturation induction of ferromagnets is higher than for ferrimagnets because all magnetic moments are aligned in parallel. In the case of ferrimagnets, on the other hand, the magnetic moments of the two sublattices are aligned antiparallel to one another. Nevertheless, these materials are magnetic because the magnetic  moments of the two sublattices have different magnitudes.
Antiferromagnets Antiferromagnets As in the case of ferrimagnets, adjacent magnetic moments are aligned antiparallel with respect to one another. As they are of equal magnitude, the effective magnetization of the material is zero.
the applicable DIN standards .
The code letter specifies the alloy class: "A" pure iron, "C" silicon iron . Number 1 indicates the concentration of the main alloy element.
Table 1: Soft magnetic metallic materials: Static magnetic properties AC test data, 50 Hz 1) Magnet  type Alloying constituents by mass Coercive field strength Hc at field strength H in A/m Measuring  point  H^ in A/m Minimum amplitude permeability mr Sheet thickness in mm % 0.4 to 1.5 > 1.5 20 50 100 300 500 800 1,600 4,000 8,000 0.30 to 0.38 0.15 to 0.20 A 240 A 120 A 60 A 12 100 Fe 100 Fe 100 Fe 100 Fe 240 120 60 12 240 120 60 12 1.15 1.15 1.15 1.25 1.30 1.30 1.30 1.35 1.40 1.60 1.60 1.60 1.60 Not suitable for AC applications.
E11 60 E21 E31 06 E32 E41 03 72 to 83 Ni 54 to 68 Ni 45 to 50 Ni 45 to 50 Ni 35 to 40 Ni  2 10 24  4 10 24 0.50 0.50 0.20 0.65 0.90 0.45 0.70 1.10 0.70 0.73 1.35 1.00 0.75 1.45 1.18 0.40 0.40 1.60 40,000 6,000 2,900 40,000 6,000 2,900 F11 240 F11 60 F21 F31 47 to 50 Co 47 to 50 Co 35    Co 23 to 27 Co 60 300 300 240 1.40 1.80 1.70 2.10 1.50 1.90 2.20 1.60 2.06 2.25 2.00 1.85 2.15 2.25 2.20 2.00 As agreed  between manufacturer  and buyer.
The significance of Number 3 following : the hyphen varies according to the individual alloy. It indicates the minimum initial permeability ma/1,000 in nickel alloys; with other alloys, it designates the maximum coercive field strength in A/m. The properties of these materials are strongly geometry dependent and highly application specific. The material data quoted in extracts from the standard can therefore provide only a very general overview of the properties of these materials.
Electrical steel sheet and  electrical steel strip Applications and properties Applications and properties Packages used for transformers or as stator or rotor packages for electric motors are composed of electrical steel strips, typically by packaging individual sheet metal plates. Electrical steel strips are often provided as long strips .
Electrical steel strips typically consist of iron silicon alloys , the maximum permeability umax is at about 5,000. For S and P types, the values are in the order of magnitude of 1 A/m for Hc and about 30,000 for umax.
Grain oriented electrical steel strip Both grain oriented and non oriented electrical steel strips exist. Grain oriented electrical steel strips feature a crystal structure .
Non oriented electrical steel strips are usually delivered in a finally annealed , final annealing still has to be carried out. This is typically done to the finished laminated core.
Identifications Identifications The designations for electrical steel sheets and electrical steel strips .
The first code letter is "M" for all varieties. Number 1 is one hundredfold the maximum magnetic reversal loss at 50 Hz and 1.5 T in W/kg. Number 2 is one hundredfold the product's nominal depth in mm.
trical steel sheet or "P" grain oriented electrical steel strip with high permeability, both types are delivered in a fully processed state .
Example: An electrical steel strip designated M330 35A is a non oriented electrical steel strip in a finally annealed state, exhibits a remagnetization loss of 3.3 W/kg at 50 Hz and 1.5 T and has a thickness of 0.35 mm.
M140 30S 1.0862 0.30 0.92 1.40 1.78 Converters,  transformers,  choke coils M150 30S 1.0861 0.30 0.97 1.50 1.75 M111 30P 1.0881 0.30  1.11 1.88
Materials for transformers and : reactors .
Soft magnetic ferrite cores  Soft magnetic ferrites are formed parts made of a sintered material with the general formula MO*Fe2O3, where M is one or more of the bivalent metals Cd, Co, Ca, Mg, Mn, Ni, Zn.
Designation comprises a letter and  number combination: The various types of soft magnetic ferrites are classified in groups according to nominal initial permeability and are designated by capital letters. Additional numbers may be used to further subdivide them into subgroups; these numbers have no bearing on material quality.
The coercive field strength Hc of soft ferrites is usually in the range of 4 to 500 A/m. Based on a field strength of 3,000 A/m, induction B is in the range of 350 to 470 mT.
Depending on the shaping process, binder type and the amount of binder used, it is possible to optimize the material to achieve high saturation polarization, higher permeability or high resistivity. They are used primarily in fields in which all the above mentioned characteristics are important, and where no excessively high demands are placed on mechanical strength and machinability. These fields currently consist of quickacting actuators for diesel injection engineering and high speed small electric motors for motor vehicles.
13 14 16 18 20 5,600 6,300 6,300 6,300 7,100 7,100 6,300 7,100 7,100 7,100 7,100 7,100 5,600 6,300 6,300 6,300 6,300 6,300 6,300 6,300 7,100 7,100 7,100 7,100 1,600 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 2,000 1,800 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240 2,240
at field strength H in A/m Properties, application examples Abbreviated Name Material number by mass % g/cm3 HV T umax ohm mm 2 m A/m max.
6.6 7.0 7.2 16 11 9 175 170 165 0.70 0.90 1.10 1.10 1.25 1.40 1.40 1.45 1.55 1.55 1.65 1.75 2,000 2,600 3,000 50 60 70 0.15 0.13 0.12 S FeP 150 S FeP 130 0.45 P 0.45 P 7.0 7.2 10 8 150 130 1.05 1.20 1.30 1.45 1.50 1.60 1.65 1.75 3,400 4,000 95 105 0.20 0.19 S FeSi 80 S FeSi 50 3 Si 3 Si 7.3 7.5 4 2 80 50 1.35 1.40 1.55 1.65 1.70 1.70 1.85 1.95 8,000 9,500 170 180 0.45 0.45 S FeNi 20 S FeNi 15 50 Ni 50 Ni 7.7 8.0 7 4 20 15 1.10 1.30 1.25 1.50 1.30 1.55 1.30 1.55 20,000 30,000 70 85 0.50 0.45 S FeCo 100 S FeCo 200 50 Co 50 Co 7.8 7.8 3 3 100 200 1.50 1.55 2.00 2.05 2.10 2.15 2.15 2.20 2,000 3,900 190 240 0.10 0.35
Table 6: Soft magnetic ferrites: Ferrite type Initial permeability 1) ui Specific loss factor tan d/ui 2) Specific Power  loss3) Amplitude permeability 4) Curie temperature 5) 6) Thc Frequency  for 0.8 ui 6) Properties, application examples +25 % 10 6 MHz mW/g ua degC MHz Materials in largely open magnetic circuits Initial permeability.
Compared to metallic magnetic materials  high specific resistance , therefore low eddy current losses.
5) Curie temperature Thc in this table is the temperature at which initial permeability ui drops below 10 % of its value at 25 degC.   6) Standard values.
tic value ranges of some crystalline materials in widespread use. The values of soft magnetic materials are compared to the values of hard magnets .
Bosch grades BTMT Minimum values.
Typically SmCo5, typically Co5 8.2 8.2 8.2 5.2 165 180 190 48 950 1,000 1,050 500 440 680 560 360 500 900 700 600 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.05 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,000 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.3
R 7 1 1 R 7 1 6 R 7 1 7 R 7 1 8 Rel.
coeff. of coer.1) TK % K Manufacture, processing, applications of flux  density of polarization Abbreviated name Material number HCB HCJ Tc DIN IEC g/cm3 kJ/m3 mT kA/m kA/m up K Ceramic magnets Isotropic Manufacture: sintering.
S 1 1 1 S 1 1 2 S 1 1 3 S 1 1 5 S 1 1 8 S 1 1 10 S 1 1 14 S 1 1 3 S 1 2 3 4.8 4.6 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.9 4.8 3.4 3.5 20.0 20.0 24.0 25.0 26.0 32.0 24.0 9.0 10.0 320 320 350 370 370 410 360 220 230 170 220 215 205 230 160 260 145 165 190 280 230 220 260 165 350 190 225 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 723 0.2 0.2 to 0.5 1) Standard values.  2) Minimum values.  3) In the range of 273 to 373 K.
. 4th Edition, Publicis Corporate Publishing, 1990.
, Steel Information Center, Dusseldorf, 2005 edition.
Nonmetallic inorganic : materials These materials are characterized by ionic bonds , poor luminous reflectance, brittleness, and thus almost complete unsuitability for cold forming.
Ceramics Ceramics are at least 30 % crystalline in nature; most ceramics also contain amorphous components and pores. Their manufacture is similar to that of sintered metals, however nonmetallic powders or powder mixtures are used; sintering at temperatures generally higher than 1,000 degC gives ceramics their characteristic properties. Ceramic structural parts are sometimes also shaped at high temperatures or even by a melting process, with subsequent crystallization.
Glass Glass is viewed as under cooled, frozen liquid. Its atoms are only in a short range order. It is regarded as amorphous. Molten glass turns to solid glass at transformation temperature Tg .
________________________________ References for Nonmetallic inorganic References for Nonmetallic inorganic materials materials DIN EN 623: Advanced technical ceramics; monolithic ceramics; general and textural properties; Part 2: determination of density and porosity.
 DIN EN 843: Advanced technical ceramics Mechanical properties of monolithic ceramics at room temperature. Part 1: Determination of flexural strength. Part 2: Determination of Young's modulus, shear modulus and Poisson's ratio.
Part 1: Determination of thermal expansion. Part 2: Determination of thermal diffusivity by the laser flash method. Part 3: Determination specific heat capacity. DIN EN 60672 1: Ceramic and glass insulating materials Part 1: Terms and classification.
Silicon nitride  hot pressed HPSN Si3N4 > 95 % 3.2 600 to 900 > 3,000 310 3.2 to 3.5 30 to 45 0.7 10 12  
Standards for test procedures DIN EN 623 Part 2 
Plastics: Plastics are still a relatively "young" material group, the importance of which has continuously grown since the middle of the twentieth century. Products made of plastics play a large role in the various areas of our society today. Thus plastics are used as material in areas such as supply, medical and electrical technology, for packaging, household appliances and consumer goods.
However, the "saturation limit" for using plastics is far from having been reached. We continue to find applications in which conventional materials such as metal are being replaced by plastics.
The increasing use of plastics is mostly due to their less expensive processing options compared to other materials and to the beneficial properties of this "madeto measure material group". In addition, new material and process developments are opening new markets and simultaneously offering enormous potential for new, innovative products made of plastic. A strong increase in the plastic content is forecast particularly due to increasing electromobilization. The greatest driver is the savings in weight compared to metallic materials.
Plastics are classified into thermoplastics, : thermosets, elastomers and thermoplastic elastomers , which are discussed in more detail in the following. Thermoplastics An outstanding characteristic of thermoplastics is the non cross linked structure between the macromolecules. This enables repeated plasticity or processability above their service temperature in the melting range. Only thermoplastics can be welded.
The material class of the thermoplastics can be further classified into amorphous thermoplastics and semicrystalline thermoplastics ). The block copolymers existing in multiple phases form the link to the material class of thermoplastic elastomers.
High continuous service temperature,  low dependency of properties on temperature, not resistant to fuel and alcohol at higher temperatures, dimensionally stable components
thermoplastics, the combination of load and higher temperature leads to creep or relaxation due to the viscoelastic and viscoplastic material behavior. In Figure 6, the creep and relaxation behavior of thermoplastics is compared to the material behavior of metals .
Low dependence of properties on  temperature, not resistant to fuel  and alcohol PVC P Polyvinyl chloride  Weatherproof exterior parts,  pipes SAN Styrene acrylonitrile Molded parts with good chemical  resistance, also transparent SB Styrene butadiene Impact resistant housing parts  for many applications SPS GF Syndiotactic polystyrene Low warpage, brittle, high mold  temperatures required for processing PI Polyimide High resistance to heat and radiation,  can be processed only by compacting and sintering PTFE Polytetrafluorethylene Strong dependence of rigidity  on temperature, high resistance  to heat, aging and chemicals,  can be processed only by compacting and sintering
Table 2 and Table 3 show the mechanical : properties of amorphous and semicrystalline materials. The values reproduce reference values from literature . The values may differ depending on the manufacturer and composition of filler or reinforcing material.
Chemical properties of thermoplastics Chemical properties of thermoplastics The chemical behavior of thermoplastics is determined by the structure of the macromolecules from which they are built. Polar plastics are attacked by polar solvents; non polar plastics are attacked by non polar solvents. Substances with a low molecular weight can migrate through solid thermoplastics .
chemical properties of some thermoplastics. The values are reference values from literature . Since the chemical behavior is difficult to estimate in some cases, consulting the plastics manufacturer or conducting your own measurements is advised.
Durability and aging of thermoplastics Durability and aging of thermoplastics Aging includes all irreversible changes to a material over time . Aging processes change the properties of thermoplastics during a certain period of time. The causes of aging are distinguished between inner . These causes lead to aging processes that manifest themselves in signs of aging and have a visible or measurable effect on thermoplastics. Examples of this are swelling, aftershrinkage, discoloration and alteration of the mechanical properties, such as brittleness.
of different test speeds and temperatures on the stress strain behavior of  thermoplastics a) Dependency on the test speed, b) Dependency on the temperature.
More physical properties : More physical properties  of the thermoplastics of the thermoplastics Thermoplastics have good insulation properties against electricity and heat. Compared to other materials, thermoplastics have significantly larger and anisotropic coefficients of thermal expansion . Some thermoplastics, above all polyamides, absorb a significant amount of water, which results in changes to the mechanical and physical properties as well as the component dimensions.
Processing of thermoplastics Processing of thermoplastics Thermoplastics are usually made available by raw material producers in granular form as sacked goods and can be processed in commercially available injection molding machines and extruders. Since thermoplastics are deformable, they can also be processed using deep draw or compression methods. Since thermoplastics are meltable and solidify again, they can be also be welded during the production process and can be recycled to a certain extent.
Code E module Tensile strain at yield or tensile stress at break Tensile strain at yield or Elongation at fracture Glass transition temperature Continuous service temperature ABS 1,300 to 2,700 32 to 45 n/s 250 to 270 260 * Flexural E modulus, y Value at first maximum value during the tensile test, b Value at which the specimen breaks, n/s Not specified.
Table 3: Mechanical properties of semicrystalline thermoplastics: Code E module Tensile strain at yield or tensile stress at break Tensile strain at yield or Elongation at fracture Glass transition temperature Continuous service temperature PA 11 1,370 127 260 k Conditioned, tr Dry, y Value at first maximum value during the tensile test, b Value at which the specimen breaks.
Thermoplastic elastomers: Thermoplastic elastomers .
Types of thermoplastic elastomers Types of thermoplastic elastomers "Thermoplastic elastomers" is the umbrella term for a whole series of different materials. They are always created through blends or block copolymers.
The blends are alloys made of a plastic matrix and a soft elastomer material. Block copolymers are molecular chains with different segments that congregate into hard and soft areas during cooling. Based on DIN EN ISO 18064 , the  following subdivision can be made.
Properties of thermoplastic elastomers Properties of thermoplastic elastomers The number of diverse commercial types with different properties on the market is very large. They, like thermoplastics, are usually made available by raw material producers in granular form as sacked goods.
Thermoplastic elastomers can be processed very well using injection molding and extrusion processes, since they pass through the plastic, molten state. They can be manufactured in all hardnesses from 5 Shore A to over 70 Shore D. The hardness and the compression set  are essential characteristics when using thermoplastic elastomers as sealants. Their thermal stability in particular is usually lower than that of elastomers. The maximum continuous service temperatures that can currently be attained for thermoplastic elastomers are approximately 150 degC.
Adhesion to nearly all technical thermoplastics can be achieved through modification. Their flowability as well as density, optics, scratch resistance and other properties can also be adjusted through compounding with a wide variety of fillers and additives.
Application of thermoplastic elastomers: Application of thermoplastic elastomers Thermoplastic elastomers find a wide variety of applications in various industries while fulfilling the industry standard requirements. Thus they are used in the automotive industry for control elements in the interior as well as for window trim in the exterior and for seals close to the engine. Furthermore, they are used in the industrial sector, for example, for tool handles or cable jackets. In the consumer sector, thermoplastic elastomers are found in toys, sports equipment, packaging, and personal care supplies such as toothbrushes and shavers. There are special compounds that satisfy the high requirements even for medical applications. They are used, for example, for drip chambers, seals and medical hoses.
Elastomers Elastomers . This loose fixation of polymer chains through chemical bonds leads to typical elastic behavior above the glass transition temperature Tg. This value usually lies significantly below 0 degC, and therefore below the service temperature of rubber compounds.
On the other hand, if the cross linking is made solid and close meshed, we speak of a thermoset. Cross linked elastomers  cannot be melted; that is, they decompose at high temperatures without melting.
The starting point for manufacturing elastomer materials is either natural or synthetic rubber. The rubber is mixed with various additives such as fillers, plasticizers, cross linking chemicals, anti aging agents and processing aids; then they are cross linked under the influence of temperature.
During the cross linking .
Properties of elastomers Properties of elastomers General basic properties such as thermal and media resistance are already largely determined by the base rubber being used. These can be changed only within certain boundaries. Yet within an elastomer class, such as NBR, there is a wide variety of different mixtures that can have significantly different specific properties such as hardness, strength behavior and elasticity. In addition, component suppliers often use their own recipes for their materials and the rubber compounds are often specially designed for the requirements of an application. Unlike thermoplastics or thermoplastic elastomers, non cross linked elas 
tomer mixtures are available on the free : market only in a few cases and are not offered also in granular form as sacked goods or the like.
of the names, application examples and some important properties of the most common kinds of elastomers. Please note: The data specified there can serve only as inexact guideline values and must be verified in each individual case of an intended application.
Code Designation Application examples M group ACM Acrylate rubber Oil circuit , interior
3 2 3 4 4 1 Very good resistance Materials with better ozone resistance are possible
applications for this material class. Thus : rubber compounds are used to manufacture products that bridge tolerances, permit movement between various components, constitute static and dynamic seals, diminish vibrations and act as springs.
Typical technical applications include tires, seals , V belts, hoses, flexible couplings, cable jackets, bearing elements, retaining elements, shock absorbers, windshield wipers, conveyor belts, roofing foils and shoe soles. But elastomers are also used to manufacture items for everyday use such as rubber boots, erasers, rubber bands, balloons, condoms, rubber gloves, pacifiers and wet suits.
Thermosets Thermosets are the first plastics to have been manufactured for industrial production using a synthetic method. As early as 1910, Bakelite, a resin made of formaldehyde and phenol, came into use. In the 1920s and 1930s, molding resin masses with urea and melamine jointed it on the market. Polyester and epoxy resins were used for the first time after the end of World War II .
The varied types of thermosets find application in a wide variety of areas in the automotive industry. In addition to structural components, which will be covered in more detail below, this includes paint and adhesive systems, sealing compounds and substrates for interconnect devices in electronics.
The good thermal properties of thermosets make them particularly suitable for use in thermally stressed areas. This  specifically relates to applications in the  engine compartment of automobiles. Typical examples of components made of thermoset include water pump housings, belt pulleys and impeller wheels .
Unsaturated Unsaturated polyester resins polyester resins Unsaturated polyester resins .
Epoxy resins Epoxy resins Epoxy resins structural lightweight components as matrix materials in the automotive industry.
grade Properties,  application examples Thermosets LD35 to LD45  Melaminephenol Cellulose 160/140 80 7 CTI 250 For parts subject to electrical  and mechanical loads.
; types 803,  804: glow heat resistant.
4) Tracking resistance according to DIN IEC 112, Comparative Tracking Index Barely used any more in new applications. Supply not guaranteed in the long term.
Phenol formaldehyde resins: Phenol formaldehyde resins Phenol formaldehyde resins  are manufactured from phenol and formaldehyde using polycondensation. They have high mechanical rigidities and strengths and feature high chemical resistance, thermal resistance and dimensional stability under heat. In addition, there are tribologically modified forms that, however, cost significantly more because carbon fibers are added. PF resins are inherently flame retardant, which makes them ideal for applications in engine compartments.
Extenders Extenders Filler are classified in accordance with  DIN EN ISO 1043 2 . Technically relevant fillers primarily include glass fibers and glass balls as well as mineral fillers. Particularly in the aerospace industry, but also increasingly in the automotive industry, carbon fibers are also being used as reinforcement materials for thermo sets.
Processing method Processing method Thermosetting molding compounds are primarily processed using compacting or injection molding. There is also a wide variety of other processes in which the listed variants are combined or further developed.
Compacting For compacting, pressure and temperature simultaneously act upon the molding compound. The mass is fed into the mold either without a form or in tablet form. Pressure brings the mass into the desired form, while the temperature cross links the material. Due to the low machine based effort, compacting is the least expensive processing method. However, this method can be used to manufacture only simple, large format components. Above all, the manufactured components feature low level of orientation and the need for large amounts of finishing.
Injection molding Here it is necessary to distinguish between easy flowing granulate material and polyester bulk molding compound. Exceptionally high productivity is achieved when processing easy flowing granulate material where the length of cycle times is largely dependent on component thickness. The barrel temperatures during injection molding are between 80 and 100 degC, while the mold temperatures range from 160 to 190 degC. While the injected mass is curing in the mold, new material for the next cycle is already being plasticized in the screw. When processing polyester bulk molding compound , it is important to note that a stuffing unit is required in addition to the conventional machine equipment to convey the material into the screw. Then the material is homogenized in the injection barrel. Melting is not necessary; the barrel temperatures are usually around 25 to 35 degC.
Insulating materials Electrical insulation plays a critical role in the proper functioning and service life of items such as alternators, engines and electrical devices, not just in motor  vehicles.
Unfilled polymers have the best electrical insulation properties. Each addition of fillers reduces the dielectric strength of a polymer material by forming interfaces between the filler and polymer matrix as well as by excessive stress due to different dielectric properties.
As an example here we will discuss sur : face insulators. These are usually used as more or less flexible combined insulation materials in electrical machines such as starters, alternators, hybrid engines and traction motors.
Plastic foils are flexible combined insulation materials that are bonded to pressboard, nonwoven materials or paper made of polymers. Flexible combined  insulation materials often have a three ply design with plastic foil as the middle layer. Depending on the combination of materials, they have different continuous service temperatures, tensile strengths and elongations at break, dielectric strengths, rigidities and impregnabilities.
The combination of plastic foils with  fiber or nonwoven materials has technical advantages. Plastic foil made of unfilled polymers provides excellent electrical properties. The fiber or nonwoven materials, by contrast, have good impregnability and protect the foil against mechanical and thermal loads.
Foils made of polyester or polyimide are predominantly used as initial components as well as fiber or nonwoven materials made of organic fibers, polyester or aramide.
Flexible combined insulation materials are standardized as DIN EN 60626 1 . In addition, there are standards for other surface insulators.
the cured molding compound in later use, such as hardness, elasticity, stretchability or pliability, thermal, mechanical, electrical and chemical loads of the molded components.
pigments, accelerators, toughness modifiers, wetting agents, degassing agents and anti sedimentation agents The chemical resistance of sealing compounds depends on the components of the cast resin, the cross link density and the degree of cross linking. As a rule of thumb, hard sealing compounds are more resistant than soft ones.
The final properties of the cured sealing compounds largely depend on the kind and quantity of ingredients used and the curing conditions. Therefore generally applicable specifications about physical properties are not possible.
Epoxide systems Epoxide systems Epoxides have been widely used for many years. They are generally hard and capable of carrying loads, their volume shrinkage during curing is rather low.
Characteristics include their excellent mechanical properties, good temperature tolerance, good adhesive strength on a wide variety of surfaces, and likewise good chemical resistance. The cross linking or curing process is generally slow, particularly if only small volumes react with each other. More reactive hardeners could be used, but that can cause a substantially stronger exothermic reaction, creating stress for components and the printed circuit board.
Fillers are an essential component of epoxy resin formulations. They reduce costs and improve mechanical properties. At the same time, they lead to an increase in the crack resistance and rigidity, as well as to a reduction in thermal shrinkage, lowering lower inner stresses. Quartz powder is a standard filler in electronic  applications.
Polyurethane systems Polyurethane systems Even after curing, polyurethane sealing compounds can still expand and flex  are cast.
The curing reaction for polyurethane systems is less exothermic than for epoxide sealing compounds. The volume shrinkage after the hardening is low and a broad spectrum of hardness and/or elasticity is available. The chemical and mechanical resistances are good.
Silicone Silicone Silicone based sealing compounds are usually significantly more expensive than epoxide or polyurethane sealing compounds, but they are used where typical continuous service temperatures are above 180 degC. The exothermic heat buildup during the hardening is also only very low.
Polyester systems Polyester systems These systems have very good resistances to a wide variety of media, but a very strong heat buildup during hardening and a high degree of shrinkage after the hardening as a result. Under certain circumstances this leads to thermo mechanical damage to the cast components, even to the point of having components tear away from the substrate.
References for plastics: References for plastics . In: Plastverarbeiter , p. 80 83, 2012.
. 10. Aufl., Carl Hanser Verlag, 2010.
, 31. Aufl., Carl Hanser Verlag, 2013.
.
. 1. Aufl., Dr. Gupta Verlag, 2007.
. Dr. Gupta Verlag, 2001.
. 2. Aufl., Hanser Fachbuch, 1988.
 DIN EN 60626: Combined flexible materials for electrical insulation. Part 1: Definitions and general requirements.
Sheet 3: Requirements for polycarbonate : films used for electrical insulation. Sheets 4 to 6: Requirements for polyimide films used for electrical insulation.
Part 3 3: Specifications for individual  materials Requirements for rigid laminated sheets based on melamine resins. Part 3 4: Specifications for individual  materials Requirements for rigid laminated sheets based on phenol resins.
Part 3 5: Specifications for individual  materials Requirements for rigid laminated sheets based on polyester resins. Part 3 6: Specifications for individual  materials Requirements for rigid laminated sheets based on silicone resins. Part 3 7: Specifications for individual  materials Requirements for rigid laminated sheets based on polyimide resins. .
https://www.peters.de/de/download center. DIN EN ISO 14526 1: Plastics Phenolic power moulding compounds Part 1: Designation system and basis for specifications.
 DIN EN ISO 14528 1: Plastics Melamine formaldehyde powder moulding compounds Part 1: Designation system and basis for specifications.
Hardness: Hardness is a property of solid materials that defines the resistance of a materials against penetration by a harder solid body. In metallic materials the hardness is used to assess mechanical properties such as strength, machinability, malleability, and resistance to wear. DIN EN ISO 18265  defines guidelines for converting hardness to tensile strength.
Hardness testing Hardness testing is a nondestructive way of obtaining information about the mechanical properties of a material in a relatively short time.
The test data are generally derived from the size or depth of the deformation produced when a specified indentor is applied at a defined pressure. A distinction is made between static and dynamic testing. Static testing is based on measurement of the permanent impression left by the indentor. Conventional hardness tests include the Rockwell, Vickers and Brinell procedures. Figure 1 compares the fields of application of hardness testing based on these different procedures.
Another option for obtaining an index of surface hardness is to scratch the surface with a harder test tool and then measure the groove width.
Hardness testing methods Rockwell hardness .
for different test methods for unalloyed and low alloy steels and cast steel The figures at the range extremities indicate the hardness data for the respective method. HV Vickers hardness, HR Rockwell hardness, HBW Brinell hardness.
UAM0006 1E 100 0 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1,000 HV HV HRC HRA RR 30N RR 45N HRB HRF HBW RR 15N Hardness 60.7 69.6 20.3 41.7 41 76 19.9 99.5 115.1 618 75.4 84.4 93.2 68 85.6 82.6
The test specimen's surface should be smooth and as flat as possible. When testing on convex cylindrical or spherical surfaces, the value determined must be corrected as a function of the hardness. The abbreviation for the selected test method should be appended to the numerical value when specifying hardness , the preliminary test force and the total test force. Depending on the indentor used and the total test force applied, different hardness scales with the abbreviations HRA, HRB, HRC, HRD, HRE, HRF, HRG, HRH, HRK, HR15N, HR30N, HR45N, HR15T, HR30T and HR45T are used.
Advantages of the Rockwell test method include minimal specimen preparation and rapid measurement. This test process can also be fully automated. Any tester vibration, or shifting and movement of either the test specimen or the indentor can lead to testing errors, as can an uneven support surface or a damaged indentor.
hardness test Material Brinell hardness Load factor  0.102 F/D 2 Steel; nickel and titanium alloys 30 Cast iron < 140 >= 140 10 30 Copper and  copper alloys < 35 5 35 to 200 10 > 200 30 Light metals  and their alloys < 35 2.5 35 to 80 5 10 15 > 80 10 15 Lead and tin 1 Sintered metals see  DIN EN ISO 4498 
In the Brinell hardness designation, the : numeric value is accompanied by the abbreviation for the method, the ball diameter in mm and the test force in N multiplied by a factor of 0.102 . High test loads producing deformations extending over a relatively wide surface area can be employed to gather data on materials with inconsistent structures. An advantage of the Brinell method is the relatively high degree of correlation between the Brinell hardness factor and the steel's tensile strength.
Vickers hardness This test method can be used for all metallic materials, regardless of hardness. It is especially suitable for testing minute and thin specimens, while the potential application range extends to include surface and case hardened parts, as well as nitrided workpieces and parts carburized in nitrogen based atmospheres.
2 F sin 136 ___ 2  ________ d 2   0.1891 F __ d 2  , with test force F in N and arithmetic mean value d of diagonal lengths d1 and d2 in mm.
In the formula for Vickers hardness data, the actual test figure is accompanied by the abbreviation HV, the force in N .
The test specimen's surface should be smooth and flat. DIN EN ISO 6507  stipulates that correction factors be used to compensate for any error stemming from surface curvature. Test load levels are selected with reference to either the thickness of the workpiece to be tested or the layer to be tested.
In the Knoop hardness designation, the numeric value is accompanied by the abbreviation HK for the method, the test force in N multiplied by a factor of 0.102 and if necessary separated by a slash the application period of the test force in s .
The penetration depth is roughly 1/3 less than in the Vickers method, allowing evaluation of surface hardness in thin parts and layers. However, the test method also places heightened demands on the surface: The test must be performed on a polished, smooth and flat surface.
Martens hardness In this method, the penetration of a pyramid shaped test tool into materials is recorded, in the course of which both the force and the travel during plastic and elastic deformation are measured. Martens hardness is defined as the ratio of test force F to surface AS of the indentor calculated from penetration depth h, and given in N/mm2.
Scleroscope hardness Scleroscope hardness This dynamic measurement method is specially designed for heavy and large metal pieces. This process is based on the measurement of the rebound height of a steel indentor featuring a diamond or hard metal tip. This is dropped from a stipulated height onto the surface of the test specimen. The rebound serves as the basis for determining the hardness. The method is not standardized and there is no direct correlative relationship with any other hardness testing method. Heat treatment processes Heat treatment is employed to adapt the technological material properties of metallic components and tools to the relevant requirements. Such requirements can be processing properties to suit manufacturing and usage properties to suit function. According to DIN EN 10052 , heat treatment involves "subjecting a workpiece in whole or in part to time and temperature cycles in order to bring about a change in its properties of its structure. If necessary, the chemical composition of the material can be changed during the treatment".
until an austenitic structure emerges, and until an adequate quantity of carbon is dissolved in the treated material. After austenitizing, the workpiece is cooled or quenched at a rate sufficient for hardening, which can also occur in temperature stages. A complete conversion to the martensitic microstructure should be completed as quickly as possible. The necessary cooling process is determined by the chemical composition, the austenitizing conditions, the shape and dimensions, and the desired microstructure. Reference values for the required cooling rate can be found in the time temperature transformation chart for the steel in question.
where the carbon content in % by mass is to be applied for x here. If the microstructure does not consist entirely of martensite, then the maximum hardness will not be achieved.
When the carbon content exceeds 0.6 % by mass, it may be assumed that the material's structure contains untransformed austenite  in addition to the martensite. Greater amounts of residual austenite can have a deleterious effect on achievable hardness and reduce wear resistance. In addition, residual austenite is metastable, i.e. there exists a potential for subsequent transformation to martensite at temperatures below room temperature or under stress. This can give rise to unwanted changes in the workpiece's dimensions and shape. Prompt low temperature follow up procedures or draw tempering operations at over 230 degC can be useful in cases where residual austenite is an unavoidable product of the hardening procedure.
Hardening Austempering Draw tempering Thermochemical treatment Annealing Precipitation hardening Through hardening cross section Surface hardening Hardening  of carburized parts Isothermic transformation in the bainite stage Tempering of hardened parts Tempering above 540 degC for quenching and drawing Carburizing Carbonitriding Nitriding Nitrocarburizing Boron treatment Chromating Stress free annealing Recrystallization annealing Soft annealing Spheroidization Normalizing Homoge nizing Solution treatment and aging
gradient is obtained from the material : composition and the hardenability dependent on the austenitizing conditions (testing described in DIN EN ISO 642, .
DIN EN ISO 18265 defines the method for using hardness as the basis for estimating tensile strength Rm. This method can only be applied in cases whether the surface and core hardnesses are virtually identical.
During hardening, the transformation of the microstructure to the martensitic state is combined with an increase in volume. With regard to the initial state, the volume increases by approximately 1 %. This equates to a change in length of approximately 0.3 %.
The changes in volume associated with rearrangements of the structure and thermal gradients during cooling give rise to stresses, which in turn result in distortion in the form of changes in dimension and shape. The stresses that remain in the workpiece after hardening are called internal stresses. The edge of a hardened workpiece tends to be subject to internal tensile stress, while the core tends to be subject to internal compressive stress. Surface hardening Surface hardening This process is especially suited for integration within large scale manufacturing operations, and can be adapted to fit the rhythm of the production line.
These methods can be used to treat both linear and flat surfaces, meaning that the parts can be heated either while stationary or in motion. The heat source itself can also be moved. Rotation is the best way of dealing with radially symmetrical parts, as it ensures concentric hardening. Either immersion or spraying arrangements can be applied for quenching. Information on performing surface hardening can be found in DIN 17022 5 .
Heat rise is rapid, so the temperatures must be 50 to 100 degC higher than those used in furnace heating so as to compensate for the shorter dwell period. The procedure is generally employed with low alloy or unalloyed steels with mass carbon contents of 0.35 to 0.60 %. However, surface hardening processes can also be applied with alloyed steels, cast iron and rolling bearing steels. The parts can be heat treated to provide a combination of improved base strength and high surface hardness, making them suitable for highstress applications is reduced from the superposition of bending stress and internal stress.
when heating with different sources Energy source Normal power density in W/cm2 Laser beam 103 to 104 Electron beam 103 to 104 Induction 0.5
The relationship defined in equation 1 can : be employed to estimate the potential surface hardness. There is a substantial reduction in hardness between the surface and the unhardened core region. The surface hardness depth SHD the depth at which 80 % of the minimum Vickers surface hardness is found can be derived from the hardness progression curve .
Austempering The object of this process is to achieve a bainite microstructure. This microstructure is not as hard as martensite, but does display greater ductility, as well as smaller changes in specific volume.
After austenitizing .
Austempering is an excellent alternative for parts whose geometrical configuration makes them sensitive to distortion or cracks, or in which high ductility is required together with substantial hardness, or which should combine hardness with a low level of residual austenite.
Application Application Cylinder heads in modern diesel high pressure pumps for common rail systems which must be able to withstand high wear and internal compressive stresses are austempered.
Draw tempering Draw tempering of hardened components and tools is employed to increase their deformability and to reduce their risk of cracking. According to DIN EN 10052 , draw tempering involves heating the part in question once or repeatedly to tempering temperature, holding the part at this temperature, and then allowing it to cool appropriately. Draw tempering is performed between room temperature and Ac1 temperature, i.e. the temperature at which austenitic structural constituents would be created.
Tempering at temperatures as low as 180 degC is enough to reduce the hardness of unalloyed and low alloy steels by approx. 1 to 5 HRC. The individual materials respond to higher temperatures with specific characteristic hardness loss. Figure 3 shows a characteristic tempering curve for typical types of steel. This graph illustrates the fact that the hardness of steels which are alloyed with special carbide forming elements .
1 Case layer, 2 Bending stress, 3 Reduction of tensile stress,  4 Resulting stress, 5 Internal stress,  6 Increase in compressive stress.
The specific volume decreases when structures which are free of residual austenite are tempered. In the case of structures containing residual austenite, however, an increase in volume occurs during the transformation from residual austenite to martensite. Hardness increases, deformability is reduced, and new internal stresses can be created. The risk of cracking also increases.
It must be remembered that steels alloyed with manganese, chromium and nickel, or combinations of these elements, should not be tempered at temperatures of 350 to 550 degC, as brittleness could result. When these types of materials are cooled from tempering temperatures above 550 degC, the transition through this critical range should also be effected as rapidly as possible . This tempering sensitivity can be avoided by adding molybdenum or tungsten by alloying.
Quenching and drawing Quenching and drawing involves a combination of hardening and tempering at a temperature which is generally between 540 degC and 680 degC. This procedure is designed to achieve an optimal relationship between strength and ductility. It is applied in cases where extreme ductility or malleability is required.
Annealing Annealing can be applied to optimize certain operational or processing characteristics of parts. With this method, the parts are heated to a specific temperature and maintained there for an adequate period before being cooled to room temperature. The most important annealing processes in terms of technology are described in the following.
Stress free annealing Stress free annealing Depending on the precise composition of the parts, stress free annealing is carried out at temperatures ranging from 450 degC to 650 degC. The specific object is to achieve a reduction in internal stress in components, tools and castings.
Recrystallization annealing Recrystallization annealing Recrystallization annealing is applied with cold form parts. The goal is to restructure the grain pattern in order to prevent increased hardening, thereby facilitating subsequent machining work.
The temperature requirement depends upon the composition of the material and the degree of deformation: it lies between 550 degC and 730 degC for steel.
Soft annealing and Soft annealing and spheroidization spheroidization The purpose of soft annealing is to improve the machinability of material states which are difficult to cut or difficult to coldform. The process involves heating the material in question to temperatures in excess of 600 degC, as briefly as possible above the Ac1 temperature for the relevant steel, holding at this temperature, and slowly cooling to room temperature. The temperature requirement is determined by the material's composition. It ranges from 650 degC to 850 degC for steel, and lower for nonferrous materials.
types of steel 1 Unalloyed tempering steel .
carbide pattern is desired. The cementite : loses strength as a result of the annealing temperature and can pursue its striving for a body with as small a surface as possible . If the initial structure is martensite or bainite, the result will be an especially homogeneous carbide distribution.
Normalizing Normalizing Normalizing is carried out by heating the parts to austenitizing temperature and then allowing them to gradually cool to room temperature. In low alloy and unalloyed steels, the result is a structure consisting of ferrite and perlite. This process is essentially employed to reduce grain size, reduce the formation of coarse grain patterns in parts with limited reshaping, and to provide maximum homogeneity in the distribution of ferrite and perlite. Precipitation hardening Precipitation hardening This process combines solution treatment with aging at ambient temperature. The parts are heated and then maintained at a temperature to bring precipitated structural constituents into a solid solution, and quenched at room temperature to form a supersaturated solution. The aging process comprises one or several cycles in which the material is heated and held at above ambient temperatures . In this process, one or several phases, i.e. metallic bonds between certain base alloys, are formed and precipitated in the matrix.
The precipitated particles enhance the hardness and strength of the base microstructure. The actual characteristics are determined by the temperature and duration of the aging process . Exceeding a certain maximum will usually reduce the strength and hardness of the final product.
Thermochemical treatment: In thermochemical treatment, the exchange of substances with suitable agents effects a change in the chemical composition of the base material. Specific function properties can be adapted by the diffusion of specific elements into the surface layer. Of particular importance for this process are the elements carbon, nitrogen and boron. Carburizing, carbonitriding  and case hardening Carburizing increases the carbon content in the surface layer, while carbonitriding supplements the carbon enrichment with nitrogen. This process usually takes place at temperatures ranging from 750 to 1,050 degC in gases which give off carbon or nitrogen as a result of their disintegration by heat or excited in the plasma. The actual hardening is performed subsequently, either by quenching directly from the carburizing or carbonitriding temperature . This process produces a martensitic surface layer, while the degree of martensite at the core is a function of hardening temperature, hardenability and part thickness.
Specific temperatures can be selected for either surface hardening in the upper layers with higher carbon content . The distance between the surface and the point at which the mass carbon content is still 0.35 % is normally defined as the carburization depth.
The length of the carburizing or carbonitriding process depends upon the required carburization depth, the temperature and the atmosphere's carbon diffusion properties.
Typical surface carbon contents during case hardening range between 0.5 and 0.85 % carbon by mass in order to achieve sufficient surface hardness. The carbon concentration essentially determines the surface hardness.
Excessive concentrations of carbon can lead to residual austenite or carbide diffusion, which could have negative effects on the performance of case hardened parts in actual use. Control of the atmosphere's carbon level is thus extremely important in process management.
The most common carburizing processes used today are gas carburizing and vacuum carburizing. In the case of gas carburizing, the carbon level of the furnace atmosphere is regulated in such a way that the surface layer of the workpiece assumes the desired carbon content. A state of equilibrium is established with the surrounding furnace atmosphere. In the case of vacuum carburizing, on the other hand, the carbon content cannot be regulated. Here, the defined surface carbon content is adjusted by means of multistage carburizing. In a first stage, carburizing is performed to a very high surface carbon content in the range of material saturation. In the subsequent stage, this high carbon content is reduced by diffusion to the desired level. In practice, vacuum carburizing processes consist of several consecutive carburizing and diffusion stages.
The gradient defining the relationship between hardness and depth corresponds to the carbon concentration curve. The case hardening depth CHD can be taken from this. DIN EN ISO 2639 defines this as the vertical distance to the surface to the layer which has a Vickers hardness of 550 HV 1.
The case hardened part generally exhibits compression tension at the surface, and tensile stresses at the core. As with surface hardened materials, this distribution pattern provides enhanced resistance to vibration loads.
In carbonitriding, nitrogen is also absorbed; it serves to improve the material's tempering properties, increase its durability and enhance its wear resistance. The positive effects are especially pronounced with unalloyed steels.
Application Application Injection nozzles subject to wear for Bosch common rail systems which must be able to withstand high wear and internal compressive stresses are case hardened by vacuum carburizing.
Nitriding and nitrocarburizing Nitriding is a thermal treatment process  which can be used to enrich the surface layer of virtually any ferrous material with nitrogen. In nitrocarburizing, a certain amount of carbon is diffused into the material to form nitrogen at the same time.
Molecular nitrogen, as is present in this temperature range in gaseous nitrogen, cannot diffuse into metallic materials. It is therefore necessary to offer diffusible nitrogen via suitable donor media. In practical applications, nitriding and nitrocarburizing processes are performed in gas atmospheres containing ammonia, in plasma containing nitrogen, or even in molten saline solutions containing cyanate. While ammonia gas releases diffusible nitrogen during its thermal disintegration, nitrogen is ionized in the plasma in order to split the molecules and facilitate the diffusion of nitrogen atoms.
The enriching nitrogen in the surface layer causes the precipitation of nitrides, in response to which the surface layer hardens. In the final analysis, this results in greater resistance to wear and corrosion, and in greater endurance strength. As the process employs relatively low temperatures, there are no volumetric changes of the kind associated with transformations in the microstructure, so that changes in dimensions and shape are minute.
The material's resistance to wear is essentially determined by the white layer, which contains up to 10 mass components of nitrogen in %. The nitriding hardness depth and the surface hardness determine the material's resistance to alternating cyclic stress .
The corrosion resistance of nitrided or nitrocarburized workpieces can be significantly increased by postoxidation in water vapor or other suitable gases, or in molten saline solutions at temperatures ranging between 350 degC and 550 degC.
Application Application Injection nozzles which are used, for example, in Bosch common rail systems and which must be able to withstand extreme operating temperatures are gas nitrided.
Components for windshield and rear window wiper systems are nitrocarburized and postoxidized to increase their resistance to corrosion and wear. This is how these components get their typical black color.
Boron treatment Boron treatment involves enriching the surface layer of ferrous materials with boron. Depending upon duration and temperature  of the treatment, a white layer of 30 um to 0.2 mm in depth with a hardness of 2,000 to 2,500 HV is produced. It consists of iron boron.
Boron treatment is particularly effective as a means of protecting against abrasive wear. However, the comparatively high process temperature leads to relatively
large changes in shape and dimensions, : meaning that this treatment is only suitable for applications in which large tolerances can be accepted.
Corrosion processes: Corrosion is the damage to a metal as a result of a reaction with substances in the environment. Corrosion processes always contain interphase reactions. An example of this type of reaction is metal scaling, i.e. oxidation in hot gases. As it proceeds, metal atoms oxidize to form nonmetallic compounds in a process emanating from the affected material's surface. In thermodynamic terms, the process can be viewed as an entropic transition from an ordered, high energy state into a less ordered state of lower energy, and consequently greater stability. The process takes place of its own accord.
The following deals exclusively with the corrosion that occurs at the phase boundary between the metal and aqueous phases , generally referred to as electrochemical corrosion.
Electrochemical series of metals Metals are often ranked in "electrochemical series of metals" corresponding to consecutively higher standard potentials . As the value of standard potential increases the metals are referred to as "more noble", and as the value decreases as "more base".
It should be emphasized that the table  is limited to thermodynamic values, and does not reflect the effects of corrosion kinetics, for example as encountered in the formation of protective layers. Most corrosion resistant structural materials, however, develop protective layers, which are crucial to corrosion resistance. Thus, for example the materials aluminum, zinc and titanium seem to be very base metals, but are highly resistant due to the formation of protective layers. The formation of protective layers is exploited in the field of electrochemical corrosion protection.
Types of corrosion: General surface corrosion General surface corrosion is a type of corrosion with uniform attrition of material over the entire boundary surface between the material and the attacking medium. This is a very frequent type of corrosion in which the material penetration rate can be calculated per unit of time based on the corrosion current.
Pitting corrosion Pitting corrosion is a limited localized attack by a corrosive medium which penetrates the material by forming holes, or pits, whose depth is almost always greater than their diameter. Practically no material is removed from the surface outside the pitted areas. Pitting corrosion is frequently caused by chloride ions .
Contact corrosion When two different metals moistened by the same medium are in mutual electrical contact, a cathodic subprocess occurs at the more noble metal, while the anodic subprocess progresses at the baser material. This is called contact corrosion. Crevice corrosion Crevice corrosion is a corrosive attack primarily occurring in narrow crevices, caused by concentration differences in the corrosive medium, e.g. as a result of long oxygen diffusion paths. This type of corrosion generates potential differences between the crevice extremities, leading to intensified corrosion in more poorly ventilated areas.
Stress corrosion cracking This is corrosion stemming from the simultaneous concerted action of a corrosive medium and mechanical tensile stress . Intergranular or transgranular fissures form, in many cases without the appearance of visible corrosion products.
Vibration corrosion cracking Vibration corrosion cracking is corrosion caused by the simultaneous effects of a corrosive medium and mechanical fatigue stress, e.g. caused by vibrations. Transgranular cracks are formed, frequently without visible deformations.
Intergranular and transgranular corrosion This involves types of corrosion characterized by selective formation along the grain boundaries or roughly parallel to the deformation plane in the grain interior. Dezincification Selective dissolution of zinc from brass, leaving behind a porous copper structure.
Corrosion testing: Electrochemical testing procedures The primary tool for electrochemical corrosion testing is the potentiostat. Here metals or other electrically conductive materials are analyzed in different corrosive media. The typical setup with three electrodes is shown in Figure 2. This arrangement is essentially used to determine as well as the corrosion potentials of the corroding materials primarily the corrosion currents. In the case of uniform surface corrosion, the corrosion current parameters are then used for the definition of the attrition mass and removal depth per unit of time.
The electrochemical testing procedures are a valuable supplement to the non electrochemical methods, because they provide an understanding of corrosion mechanisms that occur. In addition to the small amount of corrosive medium required, another advantage of electrochemical procedures over non electrochemical methods is that they provide quantitative data on attrition rates. The potentiostat is used to alter the potential of the material to be analyzed and measure the flowing current. Evaluation enables reaction mechanisms and above all corrosion current densities to be determined.
Polarization resistance measurement Polarization resistance measurement In the case of free corrosion the corrosion current is determined from the polarization resistance ; testing entails subjecting the metal to minimal, alternating anodic and cathodic pulses.
Impedance spectroscopy Impedance spectroscopy Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy of an electrochemical test object as a function of frequency. A low amplitude sinusoidal alternating voltage is superimposed on the working electrode's potential, and the current response is measured. To interpret the measurement the system is approximated in the form of an equivalent network. By way of example, Figure 3 shows the equivalent network for the system, consisting of metal , coating, and medium.
Impedance elements at the phase boundary. In this simple example from Figure 3 the coating is along similar lines to the phase boundary of material to corrosive medium described as capacitor and resistor.
Direct conclusions can then be drawn : from the equivalent networks and the impedance elements about various characteristics, such as the effectiveness of corrosion protection measures, porosity, thickness, a coating's water absorption ability, the effectiveness of inhibitors, the corrosion rate of the base metal, and so on.
Contact corrosion current measurement Contact corrosion current measurement When contact corrosion is measured the two affected metals are immersed in the same corrosive medium. During measurement they are not directly contacted, but instead connected via the potentiostat. Here the contact corrosion potential and the contact corrosion current flowing between the two metals are directly measured and the curve plotted against the measurement period.
Non electrochemical corrosion testing procedures In non electrochemical testing procedures test specimens essentially are first exposed to a corrosive environment and then the change in the test specimens is assessed.
For the purpose of service life assessment, testing procedures have evolved to reflect specific requirements, e.g. motor vehicle testing. These are as a rule corrosion loads with cyclically alternating loading by salt spray fog, dry phase and moist phase. These tests provide reliable indices of projected service life under normal operating conditions by using shortterm exposure in extremely harsh conditions to simulate long term stresses in the real world .
Corrosion protection by means  of suitable structural design Material selection Material selection Selecting suitable materials which feature optimum resistance to corrosion under the expected conditions can be of considerable assistance in avoiding corrosion damage. When the costs that would otherwise be incurred for upkeep and repair are factored into the long term cost of ownership equation, a more expensive material can often be the more cost effective alternative.
Design Design Design measures, too, are of major importance. A great deal of skill and expertise goes into design, particularly regarding the connections between parts that are made of the same material or different materials.
Corners and edges of sections are difficult to protect, and this is where corrosion can easily attack. A favorable installation position can avoid corrosion .
Contact corrosion can be avoided by joining same or similar metals, or by installing washers, spacers, or sleeves to ensure that both metals are electrically insulated .
1 Sloping faces  ,  2 Wide gap with drain,  3 Deposits of dirt and   moisture.
In contrast, the descending current density values represent cathodic currents. As can be seen from the diagram, corrosion only occurs when potentials Ea <= E <= Ep and E >= Ed. Therefore corrosion can be suppressed by applying an external voltage. There are two basic ways of doing this.
density as a function of the potential for  a metal which can be passivated 1 Cathodic protection, occurs when E < Ea, 2 Corrosion without protection, 3 Anodic protection, occurs when Ep < E < Ed, 4 Transpassive range.
Ed. This is called anodic protection. The : anodic currents, which flow in the passive range, are less than those in the active range by exponential powers of between three and six, depending on the type of metal and the corrosive medium. The result is excellent protection for the metal. However, the potential should not exceed Ed, as oxygen would be produced in this transpassive range, potentially leading to higher rates of oxidation. Both of these effects would cause the current to increase.
Coatings Coatings inhibit corrosion by forming protective films which are applied to the surface of the metal to be protected, where they resist attack by the corrosive medium .
Inhibitors Inhibitors are substances added to the corrosive medium in low concentrations . Organic amines and amides of organic acids are the most frequent inhibitors. In automotive applications, for example, inhibitors are used in fuel additives. They are also added to antifreeze in order to inhibit corrosion damage in the coolant circuit.
Vapor phase inhibitors Vapor phase inhibitors Vapor phase inhibitors either anodic or cathodic corrosion subreactions, or both at once. Dicyclohexylamin nitrite is a typical example.
For optimal effectiveness, the inhibitor should form a sealed coating extending over the largest possible surface area. Standard commercial vapor phase inhibitors are generally a combination of numerous components capable of providing simultaneous protection for several metals or alloys; exceptions: cadmium, lead, tungsten and magnesium.
Vapor phase inhibitors provide only temporary protection for metallic products during storage and shipping. They must be easy to apply and remove. The drawback of vapor phase inhibitors is that they are potentially injurious to health.
 DIN EN ISO 4628 3:2016 07: Paints and varnishes Evaluation of degradation of coatings Designation of quantity and size of defects, and of intensity of uniform changes in appearance.
tional coating is produced by diffusion of atoms or ions into the base material. Deposits Electrodeposits Electrodeposits are deposited using an external power source. The workpieces to be coated are immersed into an electrolyte . The progression and distribution of the field lines influence the liner thickness distribution. A uniform layer thickness can be achieved by means of an optimized configuration of anodes and screens.
a) Progression and distribution of electrical field lines between anode and cathode as caused  by nonuniform liner thickness distribution. b) Comparison of liner thickness distribution during electroplating without auxiliary agent,  with auxiliary anodes and with screens . 1 Anode, 2 Cathode, 3 Auxiliary anode, 4 Screen. b 1 1 2 4 4 4 4 1 1 2 a 3 3 SAM0114 1Y
Table 1: Areas of application for coatings: approx. 15 % nickel offer a significantly higher degree of corrosion protection. Nickel Nickel Electrolytically deposited nickel coatings offer limited corrosion protection with an attractive visual appearance. One area of automotive engineering in which this is chiefly used is the nickel plating of sparkplug shells.
Chrome Chrome In the case of chrome deposits, a distinction is made between hard chrome and bright chrome. Bright chrome is used as a deposit approx. 0.3 um thick with a nickel or copper/nickel intermediate deposit. In the past, bumpers and molding strips were provided with bright chrome deposits for decorative reasons. Decorative chrome deposits have become an important element in vehicle design.
Hard chrome deposits are chrome deposits with a thickness greater than 2 um. Owing to the high level of hardness of the electrolytically deposited chrome coating, it is ideally suited for use as a wear protection coating. In the past, hard chrome deposits were often applied in strong thicknesses and then mechanically reworked. Due to further developments in process engineering, components today are increasingly custom coated with coating thicknesses ranging from 5 to 10 um, and then used without reworking .
Tin Tin Electrolytically deposited tin coatings are mainly used as contact surfaces for plug in and switch contacts, and as solder contact surfaces. A coating thickness of 2 to 3 um is ideal for plug in contacts. Greater coating thicknesses are required for solder applications in order to ensure solderability even after extended storage periods.
Gold Gold Gold deposits are normally used for contacts subject to stringent requirements. They are characterized by good conductivity, low contact resistance, and good resistance to corrosion and pollutant gases. This ensures contact stability. Hard gold deposits are harder and more abrasion resistant than pure gold deposits and are suitable for contacts subject to mechanical load.
Chemically deposited coatings  , a C:H Wear protection of tools Reduction of friction and wear of components
NiP) as a corrosionand wear protection deposit, used for example in electric fuel pumps or in high pressure pumps for gasoline direct injection.
Hot immersion deposits Hot immersion coatings are deposited by immersing the substrates in a molten metal bath. Cathodically effective hot immersion deposits are used to protect low alloyed steels against corrosion. Zinc, zinc/aluminum alloys and aluminum are used. Coating start material such as sheet and strip is a cheap and widely used practice. However, free punch edges must be accepted here.
Zinc lamella deposits Zinc lamella deposits are coatings based on zinc and aluminum lamellas in an inorganic binder. They are applied by immersion centrifuging or electrostatic spraying and thermal hardening. Zinc lamella deposits are low cost corrosion protection coatings for mass produced steel parts .
Paints Paints have a wide variation range because of their broad chemical bases and numerous means of application, such as brushing, spraying, and immersing, even with the use of current .
Paint coatings can also fulfill a multitude of different functions. In motor vehicles, the primary function fulfilled by paint coatings is corrosion protection accompanied by a decorative effect, but other functions include wear protection, soundproofing or electrical insulation.
assemblies in the engine compartment, on the other hand, are usually only given one or two coats of paint. Less importance is placed here on decorative properties. Low solvent systems, above all water based paints, are almost always used in automotive engineering. Where possible, powder based paints and UV hardening paints which are completely solvent free are used.
Table 2: Structure of solid color and metallic coatings: Layer Layer thickness Structure Composition in um Binders Solvents Pigments Extenders Additives and SC Applications 1 20 to 25 Cathodic deposition Epoxy resins Polyurethane Water, small amounts  of water miscible organic solvents Inorganic  Inorganic extenders Surface active substances, anti crater agents, SC 20 % Electrophoretic coating 2a approx.
35 to 50 Extender Polyester, melamine, urea, and epoxy resins Aromatic compounds, alcohols Inorganic  and organic Inorganic  solids E.g. wetting agents,  surface active substances SC 55...> 70 % PS ESTA HR 2b approx.
100 % ESTA PS Acronyms: ESTA HR Electrostatic high rotation;  SC Solids content;  PS Pneumatic spray;  2C HS 2 components high solid 
PVD and CVD coatings: PVD and CVD coating systems are generally deposited in a vacuum supported by plasma or heat treatment on components and tools phase. Most modern procedures combine the two categories.
Hard material coatings Hard material coatings Tools are coated with hard material to increase their service life and their performance. A typical example of the tool coatings widely introduced onto the market is the gold colored titanium nitride , can be used for highspeed cutting or for dry machining.
DLC coatings DLC coatings Protecting components against wear is subject to special conditions. Here, the coating should establish a low coefficient of friction for the components that come into contact with and move relative to each other and minimize the wear for the entire layout. DLC coatings protect not only the coated component against wear, but also the uncoated opposed body. They have a very low coefficient of friction of 0.1 to 0.2, both in a dry friction pairing against steel and under media. DLC layers are media resistant and have a corrosion inhibiting effect. Due to these advantages, DLC coatings are very important in the field of coating components. However, it must be noted that coatings containing hydrogen will degrade in an oxidizing atmosphere at a local temperature of 350 degC and higher. Hard material coatings, such as TiN, can withstand considerably higher temperatures and are also used in component coating.
Different coating compositions and processes allow materials to be adapted to different wear loads or combinations of abrasive, vibration, sliding, seizure, and adhesive wear. The term DLC therefore describes not a layer but a class of materials within which there exists a multitude of coating variants with all manner of properties and with manufacturer specific nomenclature.
Plasma assisted PVD and CVD processes are conducted in such a way that the tempering temperature of the component is not exceeded during coating. This avoids impairing the hardness of the steel base material.
Low friction carbon coatings containing metal carbide i C are electrically conductive and have a microhardness of approx. 1,800 HV at a modulus of elasticity of 150 to 200 GPa.
PVD/CVD coating in vacuum chamber 1 Cathode with sputter target, 2 Gas inlet, 3 Intensive ion bombardment, 4 Substrate, 5 Substrate tension     Argon,    Metal/carbon,     Nitrogen/hydrogen.
The greatest coating hardness and wear resistance for DLC coatings is currently achieved with metaland hydrogen free ta C . For all DLC coatings, in view of their high internal compression stress, it is important to ensure a stable connection to the substrate, which is achieved for the most part with a metallic adhesive coating system.
With thicknesses of 2 to 4 um, diamond like carbon coatings offer very good wear protection and are especially suitable for precision components subject to high mechanical loads. There is no rework needed after coating.
Thermal spray coating In thermal spraying metals or alloys are melted thermally or in a plasma flame and sprayed onto the surface to be coated. There are a multitude of ways in which the procedure is modified in which ceramic surfaces can be created as well as metallic coatings. By choosing the relevant procedure, it is possible to create tightly sealed coatings for example for wear or corrosion protection or porous, permeable coating systems.
Coatings Diffusion coatings Surface treatment can be selectively combined with surface hardening by using the diffusion process to thermochemically carburize, carbonitride, or chromate the metal, or treat it with boron or vanadium . The metal can also be oxidized, nitrided, or sulfided without hardening.
Conversion coatings Conversion coatings are formed not exclusively by the application of a material, but by in part the chemical or electrochemical conversion of the base material. Browning coatings Browning coatings Browning coatings consist of thin iron oxide layers which are formed by the oxidation of the iron in steel in an alkaline, aqueous solution containing nitrite at temperatures greater than 100 degC. With subsequent oiling, they offer temporary corrosion protection for low alloy steels.
Phosphating coatings Phosphating coatings Phosphating coatings are formed on steel, galvanized steel, and aluminum in solutions containing phosphoric acid by immersion or spraying. Zinc phosphate coatings are predominantly used as a wash primer for paint coatings or in combination with anti corrosion oil. Manganese phosphate serves as a wear protection coating with anti seizure properties, and as a wash primer for other coatings to improve component antifriction properties. Anodized coatings Anodized coatings Anodized coatings are formed by the electrochemical conversion of metal into metal oxide in aqueous electrolytes. Aluminum, magnesium, and titanium can be anodized. Anodized coatings on aluminum materials are widely used for corrosion and wear protection.
Form deviations: No component can be manufactured with absolute precision, i.e. with an ideal geometry. A whole range of causes is responsible for this, e.g., deformations as a result of machining forces, the play in guides of machine tools, tool wear, vibrations, and much more. The consequence of this is that every component exhibits dimensional, geometrical and surface deviations. To guarantee the function it is necessary that all the permissible deviations be indicated in the drawing.
Dimensional deviations Each dimension can only be manufactured between an upper and a lower limit dimension. The difference between these two limits is called the dimensional tolerance.
Geometrical deviations Geometries also exhibit deviations from the ideal geometry. A distinction is made between form and positional deviations. Surface deviations The surface of a workpiece likewise cannot be manufactured to the ideal smoothness levels. The description of the surface texture can be specified with the aid of the primary, waviness and roughness profiles. Geometrical Product Specifications Geometrical Product Specifications  a product. Product specifications must be carried out in such a way that the component to be manufactured performs its function without limitations.
The aim of Geometrical Product Specifications is to provide a clear and complete description of the product in accordance with standardized rules. These rules are laid down in the form of GPS standards. In addition, the design intent, i.e. what is important for the function, must be apparent from a drawing.
Important standards which are important for the correct interpretation of tolerances are set out in ISO 8015 . These include among others the standard tolerancing principle.
parallelism deviations must be within this envelope. This requirements can be applied to cylinders and parallel, opposing surfaces. The envelope requirement was described in 1987 in DIN 7167  and established this principle as standard if nothing different was indicated in the drawing.
2. The 2. The independence principle independence principle In 1985 ISO 8015 defined the independence principle for the first time. According to this, dimensional and geometrical tolerances are independent of each other. Adding the two tolerances produces an envelope with a maximum material virtual size .
ISO tolerance system ISO tolerance system A special tolerance system has been defined for the pairing of two dimension elements in ISO 286 . It applies to cylinders .
The tolerance class is identified by a combination of letters and code numbers. Capital letters are used for bores, lower case letters for shafts. In this way the fundamental deviation, which indicates the position of the tolerance interval relative to the zero line, is defined . Both the fundamental deviation and the tolerance degree are indicated in ISO 286 in tables.
a) Two point dimension GG. a b c d
Geometrical tolerances Since a two point dimension cannot define geometry properties, it additionally requires an indication with regard to the permissible form or positional deviations. A form tolerance only defines how far the real form may deviate from the ideal form and therefore requires no reference. A surface must for example be flat within a specified tolerance, regardless of the position of this surface.
Positional tolerances limit the permissible deviations of an element from the ideal position relative to one or more elements, the so called reference elements. A reference is always required to define a position in space. Since references are derived from real elements, they should be as precise as possible and therefore always require a form tolerance.
General tolerances General tolerances are used to make drawings more simple. Standard workshop precision is sufficient for all dimensions and geometry elements which are not directly important to the function or exchangeability. It can be maintained without any special effort and applies to all the dimensions and geometries which are not individually toleranced. The general tolerances are dependent on the different manufacturing processes, e.g., machining .
in many drawings. The indication is pro : vided either in or near the title block. Four tolerance classes : ISO 2768 mH.
Surface parameters The surface texture can dramatically influence the function of a product. Thus, the surfaces of guides and bearings should be as smooth as possible to limit wear and friction losses. However, smooth surfaces are a disadvantage to frictional joints  since these reduce the coefficient of friction and hence also the transmittable force.
The greatest Rz value from the five individual measured lengths is designated Rz1max. Rt is the distance between the highest peak and the lowest valley of the profile of the overall measured length ln. These two parameters can also be specified to describe the surface.
Arithmetic roughness average Arithmetic roughness average Ra The roughness average Ra is the arithmetical mean of the absolute amounts of the deviations from the surface center line over the measured length ln.
UAM0232E Tolerance symbol Tolerance value in mm Reference designation Reference triangle Reference frame Reference designation A A Reference element Toleranced element Reference line A 0.05 // // UAM0231Y
filters very strongly so that for example a : single scratch is not evaluated. This is the reason why Ra is used increasingly less and Rz increasingly more for this purpose. ________________________________ References References DIN EN ISO 8015: Geometrical product specifications ; German version EN ISO 8015:2011.
Function and application: The purpose of axles and shafts is to absorb forces and torques and transmit them to the casing. But they differ with regard to their function. Thus, an axle never transmits a torque, but a shaft always transmits a torque. While an axle can be stationary or rotate, a shaft is always rotatory. While most shafts rotate .
Axles Axle serve exclusively to accommodate wheels, rollers, drums, etc. Rotating machine parts are seated on stationary axles. A rotating axle rotates in bearings about itself, while for example a wheel is permanently mounted on it. Figure 1a shows a fixed axle customary in vehicle manufacturing, while Figure 1b features a rotating axle for a railroad car. The purpose of axles is therefore confined to bearing and supporting. In practice, however, this definition is not always applied consistently, as the example of final drive shows .
1 a b 2 1 3 3 2 FSpring FWhl FWhl FWhl FWhl FSpring F Brng F Brng 1 2 2 3 3 1 5 4
Load capacity: Axles and shafts fail when the existing stresses are greater than the sustainable stresses. The load cases are important as well as the magnitude of the stresses. In other words, whether the stress involved is static or dynamic.
this that the bending stress is always alternating for axles and shafts. An exception is the eccentric shaft, where the centrifugal force rotates as a result of imbalance with the shaft and hence gives rise to a static bending stress.
Shafts are additionally subjected by the torque to torsional stress. Because bending and torsional stresses occur at the same time, a strength hypothesis is required to calculate the existing stress since these stresses cannot simply be summarized by addition. A precise re calculation based on the state of the art can be performed in accordance with DIN 743 .
Deformation If the permissible deformation is exceeded, axles and shaft can impair the function even when the load capacity is sufficient. Transverse forces give rise to deflections, to which bearings and gears react with great sensitivity . Both the edge loads on the bearings and the engagement faults at the gears generate noises and the service life is greatly reduced as a result. The maximum deflection can be easily calculated for a constant cross section. However, axles and shafts usually have complex geometries such that deflection lines are determined by means of FEM calculations.
Dynamic response Shafts are elastic components which have mass and are additionally subjected to masses such as gears, belt pulleys, etc. Therefore rotating axles and shafts are oscillating systems which are excited by centrifugal forces or by rhythmic force or torque fluctuations to forced oscillations. Resonance occurs when the excitation frequency coincides with the natural frequency. The amplitudes are in this case theoretically of infinite magnitude. In other words, an axle or a shaft can already be destroyed under very small loads if the system has enough time to oscillate in the resonant range.
Movement Stress Load case Axle stationary Bending steady, cyclic, alternating1 rotating Bending alternating Shaft rotating Bending alternating Torsion steady, cyclic,  alternating1 Eccentric shaft rotating Bending steady Torsion steady, cyclic,  alternating1 1 Depending on the application.
Design: Axles and shafts should be able to be produced cost effectively. In terms of design, this means providing for the fewest possible machined surfaces, using large tolerances, and permitting large peak tovalley heights. As well as low manufacturing costs, operational reliability must also be guaranteed. The design requirements result from the functions to be performed and the mountability, the required load capacity, the permissible deformation, and the dynamic response.
Function and mountability A shaft as pictured in Figure 2 must perform a number of functions: directing torque via shaft/hub connections, supporting forces via bearings, preventing axial displacement of the bearing rings, defining axial positions of the gears, and sealing lubricant. A seal makes other demands on the shaft surface than a bearing seat or a shaft/hub connection. It follows from this that as a rule each function has a separate shaft diameter. Securing the axial position of bearing inner rings and hubs can be performed by means of shaft shoulders and retaining rings. When installing the bearings it is important to ensure that no sealing surfaces are damaged. This necessarily results in a stepped shaft with different diameters.
Load capacity Shaft shoulders, which are required to ensure the function, give rise to stress concentrations as a result of the notch effect and thereby reduce the load capacity. Notches are also created by parallel keys and grooves for retaining rings. Since rotating axles and shafts are dynamically stressed by rotating bending, they are particularly notch sensitive. Notches must therefore be avoided in highly stressed zones. If this is not possible, the notch effect must be reduced as much as possible by design measures such as small shaft shoulders and larger radii on the inside edge.
Deformation Deformability is essentially dependent on the moment of resistance. Rigid axles and shafts with large moments of resistance are required for small deformations. It is to be noted here that hollow shafts have much better material utilization than solid shafts. Weight savings of up to 50 % are readily possible.
Dynamic response High torsional and bending stiffness result in high natural frequencies. Therefore rotating axles and shafts are designed to be as stiff as possible so that the resonant speed is sufficiently removed from the operating speed. As with deformations, hollow shafts here too present the advantage that they offer maximum stiffness with minimum mass.
Spring characteristic The spring characteristic shows the behavior of a spring or spring system. This means the dependency of spring force F or spring torque Mt on deformation. Metal springs have linear characteristics . The gradient of the characteristic is called the spring rate R.
Damping due to internal friction can be very high with rubber springs  . This means that metal springs have a notable damping rate that is only achievable by means of external friction, e.g. as occurs in layers of leaf and disc springs.
Spring combinations: A very wide variety of spring characteristics can be achieved by combining several springs . In principle, springs can be combined in parallel or in series. A combination of parallel and series springs is also possible.
___ RB  UAM0107 1Y F or Mt progressive Load removed C a b
should be noted that a loss of power occurs under permanent stress and at higher temperatures; this loss of power is called relaxation. This loss of power, which increases with rising temperature and load duration can be taken from material dependent relaxation diagrams for compression springs in DIN EN 13906 1 . From 120 degC, relaxation is no longer negligible. In unalloyed spring steels a loss of power can already occur from 40 degC. Springs subjected to tensile and compression stress Due to their high spring stiffness , metal tensile and compression test bars are suitable only for very few special applications.
to DIN 2093 a) Without contact bearing surfaces, b) With contact bearing surfaces, c) Calculated spring characteristic of a disc spring to DIN 2092.
steel grades it is possible, for design purposes in the case of static and quasi static stress, the case of static and quasi static stress, when the increase in stress as a result when the increase in stress as a result of the wire curvature is disregarded, to of the wire curvature is disregarded, to calculate with the permissible bending calculate with the permissible bending stresses in accordance with Figure 3.
overload clutches and to pre tension roll : ing bearings. Because friction occurs between the individual disc springs in spring assemblies layered in the same direction, they are also suitable for damping vibrations and shocks.
At h0/t > 0.4, the nonlinearities of the springs are no longer negligible. Spring forces, spring travel, and spring rates can be calculated with sufficient precision according to DIN 2092 , or they can be taken from the manufacturer's data.
For dynamically stressed disc springs the maximum permissible tensile stress and the permissible stress range can be taken from DIN 2093 .
Torsion bar springs Torsion bar springs Circular sections are usually selected for torsion bars. They have a very high volume utilization factor, which means that they can absorb a lot of energy, but they occupy little space.
2  2 ) ? p ? n _____________________ r 2  2  R a d F lf F F F D d Druckfeder Zugfeder d r1 r2 UAM0103Y UAM0033Y UAM0032 1Y
springs. The calculation equations are : identical for both types. Compression springs in conical form can optimize the use of space if the individual coils can be pushed into each other.
for helical springs with static stress a) Cold formed from patented drawn  spring steel wires  Hot formed from spring steels acc. to  DIN EN 10089.
a) For cold formed springs made from spring steel wires SH and DH For hot formed springs.
Extension springs Extension springs are formed either with loops or with rolled in or screwed in end pieces. Since service life is determined primarily by the loops, it is impossible to give general fatigue limit values. Coldformed extension springs hardened and tempered after drawing can be manufactured with an internal preload. This allows significantly higher stresses.
References References DIN EN 13906: Cylindrical helical springs made from round wire and bar Calculation and design. Part 1: Compression springs.
Part 3: Steels for quenching and tempering. Part 4: Spring steels and other applications. DIN 2093: Disc springs Quality requirements Dimensions.
Features: The task of bearings is to guide machine parts and support forces between surfaces that are moving relative to each other. In order to minimize the wear and power loss, the friction that occurs in the process must be kept as low as possible. Friction bearings based on the direction of the external load. Another distinguishing feature is lubrication. Hence, friction bearings can be either hydrostatically or hydrodynamically lubricated, or self lubricating. A complete separation of the sliding surfaces is the optimal state. With full lubrication there is pure fluid friction with very low coefficients of friction. The lubricant layer has a shock , vibrationand noise absorbing effect.
account of the shear forces in the lubricant. These forces are proportional to the speed at which the bearing surfaces move against each other. At low relative speeds hydrostatic friction bearings consequently operation with virtually zero friction. There is no stick slip effect when starting and after running due to the absence of slip resistance.
Hydrostatic friction bearings are therefore wear and tear resistant and consequently have a very long service life. The drawbacks of these friction bearings are the high costs and the large installation space required. For these reasons they are used primarily in heavy machine construction.
Hydrodynamic friction : bearings Application Most of the hydrodynamic friction bearings used in motor vehicle engines are plain bearings .
A friction bearing requires a bearing clearance in order to build up a lubricating gap that is capable of bearing. In the stationary state the shaft touches the bearing shell and consequently there is solid body friction. The eccentric displacement of the shaft creates a wedge shaped lubricating gap . As the rotational speed increases a lubricating film that is capable of bearing is built up as a result of the lubricant that adheres to the sliding surfaces being pumped into the wedge gap. Until the pressure has built up fully in the lubricating gap, i.e. until the sliding surfaces are completely separated, the shaft still partly touches the bearing shell. During this period the bearing is in the mixed friction range. There is pure fluid friction only when the operating rpm exceeds the transition rpm.
in plain bearing e Eccentricity, F Bearing force, hmin Smallest lubricating gap, d Shaft diameter, D Bearing inside diameter, p Pressure distribution, o Angular velocity, S  Shell center point , W Shaft center point.
with oval clearance 1 Upper bearing shell,  2 Oil supply,  3 Lower lubricating wedge,  4 Upper lubricating wedge,  5 Lower bearing shell.
With the aid of the Sommerfeld number it is possible, in accordance with DIN 31652 , to calculate the coefficient of friction u in the bearing and thus also the friction loss and the thermal stress.
Requirements The coefficients of friction given in Table 2 are approximate values, and are intended only for comparison of the different operating states. As hydrodynamic bearings also operate with mixed friction some of the time, must be able to withstand a certain amount of contamination without loss of function, and are also subjected to high dynamic and thermal stress , the bearing material must meet a number of requirements, some of which are mutually exclusive.
If a bearing is simultaneously subjected to high loads and low sliding velocities, high fatigue strength and wear resistance should take precedence over resistance to seizing. The bearing materials used in such cases are hard bronzes or special brass alloys.
Since they are subjected to dynamic loads with high sliding velocities, connecting rod and crankshaft bearings in internal combustion engines must fulfill a number of different requirements. In these applications, multilayer bearings , above all trimetal bearings, have proved themselves in practice.
The service life of friction bearings in the : crankshaft drive can be further increased through the use of special solutions such as the sputter bearing , are incorporated in the circumferential direction of the bearing surface. The bearing surface therefore exhibits soft and hard areas next to each other.
1 Steel backing shell, 2 Bearing metal, 3 Diffusion barrier .
are suitable for high stresses and are : very wear resistant; run in and emergency running properties are however less good. Lead bronzes demonstrate better emergency running properties with only slightly worse resistance to wear. Aluminum alloys have a higher corrosion resistance than babbitt metal and copper alloys .
Standardized materials for friction bearings are listed in ISO 4381 prohibits the use of lead in passenger cars. Lead is currently still permitted in commercial vehicles and in general machine construction.
Self lubricating bearings made of metal Sintered bearings Friction bearings made of sintered metal belong to the category of self lubricating bearings. They consist of sintered metals which are porous and impregnated with liquid lubricants. For many small motors in motor automotive applications, this type of bearing is a good compromise in terms of precision, installation, freedom from maintenance, service life, and cost. They are used primarily with shaft diameters from 1.5 to 12 mm.
tages of sintered bronze bearings are higher permissible sliding velocities, lower noise, and lower friction coefficients .
Material group Designation  Sint... Composition  Remarks Sintered iron B 00 < 0.3 C < 1 Cu Rest Fe Standard material which meets moderate load and noise requirements.
Sintered steel, containing Cu B 10 < 0.3 C  1...5 Cu  Rest Fe Good resistance to wear, can be subjected to higher loads than pure Fe bearing.
Sintered steel, higher Cu content B 20 < 0.2 Cu 15...20 Cu  Rest Fe Cheaper than sintered bronze, good noise behavior. Sintered bronze B 50 < 0.2 C  9...11 Sn  Rest Cu Standard Cu Sn based material, good noise behavior.
Metal ceramic bearings Metal ceramic friction bearings consist of material manufactured by powder metallurgy processes; in addition to the metallic matrix, the bearing material also contains finely distributed solid lubricant particles. Bronze, iron, and nickel are used as the material, graphite or molybdenum disulfide for example are used as the lubricant. Ceramic bearings are particularly suitable for use under high loads, and are at the same time self lubricating. However, they are very brittle and therefore sensitive to jolts and impacts.
Acetal  resin Pressure resistance MPa 80...180 70 110 250 250 100...200 Max. sliding velocity m/s 10 20 2 8 2 3 10 Specific load MPa 1...4 20...40 0.3 0.4...1 46 2 10...65 Corrosion resistance less good good very good good good very good Chemical resistance no very good conditional conditional good Max. p * u MPa * m/s 20 0.05 0.2 1.5...2 0.4...1.8 Embeddability of dirt and abraded material less good good good less good good less good 1 Value in parentheses applies to additional lubrication.
Solid polymer bearings made of thermoplastics Features Features Friction bearings made of thermoplastics are inexpensive and are suitable for low bearing forces and low operating temperatures. The danger of "seizing" is extremely small.
The tribological and mechanical properties can be varied over a wide range by incorporating lubricants and reinforcements in the thermoplastic base material.
ical loadability) Application example Application example Polymer bearings made of duroplastics are used in wiper motors as axial startup blocks made of polyimide.
Metal backed composite bearings Composite bearings are combinations of polymer materials, fibers, and metals. The respective structure deliver advantages over pure or filled polymer friction bearings with regard to load capacity, bearing clearance, heat conduction, and installation. They are also more suitable for oscillating motions.
self lubricating composite bearing 1 Polymer liner, 2 Porous bronze layer,  3 Copper layer, 4 Steel backing, 5 Tin layer. 1 2 3 4 5 UAM0022Y
Composite bearings with specially modified liners are required for heavy duty requirements in diesel high pressure injection pumps. The liner is made of PEEK or PPS with additives . The particle size is sometimes in the nanometer range.
 ISO 4382: Plain bearings; copper alloys; Part 1: Cast copper alloys for solid and multilayer thick walled plain bearings. Part 2: Wrought copper alloys for solid plain bearings.
 Commission Directive 2016/774 of 18 May 2016 amending Annex II to Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on end of life vehicles.
Application: Rolling bearings are some of the most important components in machines. Great demands are made on their load capacity and operational reliability. Rolling bearings are widely used in motor vehicles. Passenger cars and commercial vehicles are fitted with a large number of rolling bearings in bearing arrangements for alternator, starter, wheel bearing, transmission, suspension strut, drive shaft, water pump, tension pulley, steering, windshield wiper motor, fan, and fuel injection pump.
General principles Type Rolling bearings are generally made up of two races , a cage, and a rolling element assembly. The rolling elements guided by the cage roll on the raceways. Balls, cylindrical rollers, needle rollers, tapered rollers, and self aligning rollers are used as rolling elements. A rolling bearing can be lubricated with grease. It is fitted with sheet steel cover plates or rubber gaskets to prevent grease discharge and to provide a seal against dirt.
The rolling bearing transfers the outer force from one bearing race to the other via the rolling elements. A distinction is made between radial bearings and axial  bearings, depending on the main direction of load.
Structural dimensions The rolling bearing is a ready to install machine part. Various ranges of outside diameters and widths are available for a hole diameter. Standardized abbreviation codes are used to identify the diameter and width ranges of a rolling bearing. The designations are recorded in the standard DIN 623 1 .
Tolerances Dimensional and form tolerances of rolling bearings are standardized in ISO 492 ) according to precision. Rolling bearings of normal precision, i.e. tolerance class P0 , generally satisfy all the demands which are made by mechanical engineering on bearing quality. For more stringent requirements, the standard provides for more precise tolerance classes P6, P5, P4, and P2.
a) Deep groove ball bearing, b) Angular contact ball bearing, c) Needle bearing, d) Cylindrical rolling bearing, e) Tapered rolling bearing, f) Self aligning rolling bearing.
2 1 3 4 f e d c b a 2 1 3 4 2 1 4 3 2 1 3 4 2 1 4 3 4 1 2 3 UAM0117Y
Bearing play and bearing clearance: The bearing play of an uninstalled rolling bearing refers to the distance through which the bearing races can be moved against each other. A distance is made between radial play and axial play.
Radial play is defined in the standard DIN 620 Part 4 . The normal radial play category is CN. In accordance with operating conditions e.g. fits with conversion parts and temperatures it is possible also to use the other radial play categories C2 .
When bearings are installed the term used is bearing clearance. During operation the bearing clearance is determined by the original bearing play, fits and material of the conversion parts such as shaft and housing, and the temperature difference between the bearing races. As a rule a perfectly running bearing should have a very small bearing clearance.
Materials Bearing races and rolling elements are primarily composed of chrome alloy special steel 100Cr6 is used for the majority of plastic cages. This material, especially when reinforced with fiberglass, is characterized by its favorable combination of strength and elasticity.
Selection of rolling bearings It is necessary to take into account many external factors in order to choose the right bearing from the wealth of options. Selection criteria Load Load The size and direction of the load acting on the rolling bearing normally determine the type and size of the bearing. Deepgroove ball bearings are usually used in the case of low to medium loads. Rolling bearings have one advantage in the case of high loads and limited installation space. With the exception of only purely radially loaded needle bearings, cylindrical rolling bearings and axial bearings, rolling bearings can simultaneously accommodate radial and axial loads .
Deep groove ball bearings transfer axial loads in both directions, while angular contact ball bearings and tapered rolling bearings can only be axially loaded in one direction.
Cylindrical rolling bearings and self aligning bearings are particularly suitable for radial loads, but less so for axial loads. Speed limit Speed limit Ball bearings with point contact between rolling elements and raceways have a higher speed limit than rolling bearings of the same size. The permissible speed of a rolling bearing is dependent above all on the type of construction, the size, and also the lubricating process. A bearing lubricated with oil usually has a higher speed limit than a bearing lubricated with grease. Mounting Mounting A distinction is made between locking bearings . Non locking bearings include tapered rolling bearings, angular contact ball bearings, cylindrical rolling bearings, and needle bearings. These bearings are for the most part easier to assemble and disassemble than locking bearings such as deep groove ball bearings and self aligning bearings. During mounting on the shaft and in the housing, tapered rolling bearings and angular contact ball
Further selection criteria Further selection criteria In addition to the previously mentioned main criteria, it is also necessary to take into account when choosing a rolling bearing angular adjustability to compensate for misalignment between the bearing points, running smoothness, friction, and costs.
Layout of bearing arrangement As a rule, two bearings arranged at a specific distance from each other are required to guide and support a rotating machine part. There are two important variations of bearing arrangement: The locating/ floating bearing arrangement and the preloaded bearing arrangement.
Locating/floating bearing arrangement Locating/floating bearing arrangement Two radial bearings are seated on the shaft and in the housing . The distance between the two bearing points is determined by manufactured conversion parts within the framework of the tolerance. In addition, the shaft, when heated to different temperatures or when made from different materials, does not expand in the same way as the housing. These differences must be compensated for in the bearing points. For this reason, one bearing is to be axially secured as a locating bearing on the shaft and in the housing and one bearing is to be movable in the axial direction as a floating bearing. Typical applications of the locating/floating bearing arrangement can be found in alternators and steering motors.
Single row deep groove ball bearings are frequently used as locating bearings. Cylindrical rolling bearings, needle bearings, and deep groove ball bearings are usually used as floating bearings.
Double row angular contact ball bearings and tapered rolling bearings are also used, e.g. as wheel bearings, in the case of high radial and axial loads.
race is displaced on its seat surface until the bearing arrangement has attained the desired or required play or preload. Because of the possibility of play regulation, a preloaded bearing arrangement is particularly suitable for applications with close guidance, e.g. bearings in transmissions.
Tolerances and fit of bearing points Rolling bearings essentially have negative tolerances for hole diameter, outside diameter and width, i.e. the nominal size is always the maximum limit of size.
Mounting the races on the bearing points .
The load conditions of the bearing races : are of great importance to the choice of fit. A distinction is made between two loads, based on the load direction and the rotation of the bearing races.
Because of the small thicknesses of the bearing races, the form variations of the seats are transferred to the raceways. The counterparts should therefore demonstrate as much form quality as possible, such as concentricity, cylindricity, and runout.
G6 g5 g6 h5 h6 j5 j6 k5 k6 m5 m6 n5 n6 p6 G7 H6 H7 H8 J6 J7 K6 K7 M6 M7 N6 N7 P6 P7 Clearance fit Transition fit Interference fit Outer race Inner race Housing Shafts UAM0120E
Calculation of load capacity : It is necessary to distinguish between static and dynamic load capacity when calculating the load capacity of a rolling bearing. The basic principles for calculating the static and dynamic load capacities are set out in ISO 76 .
__ P0  is formed, where C0 is termed the static load rating. C0 is the load at which permanent total plastic deformation of rolling elements and raceways at the contact point subject to greatest load amounts to 0.0001 of the rolling element diameter. Catalogs specify C0 for all rolling bearings. The calculation of the static load rating C0 is shown in the standard ISO 76.
The radial factor X and axial factor Y are dependent on bearing type, size, bearing clearance, and load ratio, and are specified in ISO 281 and in rolling bearing catalogs.
Numerous systematic examinations and experiences from practice make it possible to quantify the influences of bearing materials and operating conditions on the achievable service life of rolling bearings. Diagrams and computing programs are provided by rolling bearing manufacturers to calculate the coefficients a2, a3 and a23. ________________________________ References References DIN 623: Rolling bearings Fundamental principles: Part 1: Designation, marking.
Seal technology: Function The function of a seal is to separate two different media from each other. For economic reasons it is necessary to seal existing sealing points with simple geometries. The O ring assumes the simplest of these geometries.
Classification A distinction is made between static and dynamic seals . In the case of a static seal there is no relative movement between seal and machine parts; in the case of a dynamic seal there is relative movement between seal and machine parts. This can exist both between seal and shaft and between seal and housing. 100 % tightness can be achieved with static seals, but this for the most part cannot be achieved with dynamic seals. A "leakage rate", which may not be exceeded, is defined for dynamic seals. When a seal complies with this rate, it is said to be subject to technical tightness. Materials for seals In the main elastomers but also other materials are used for seals in automotive applications. Elastomers are used in a diverse range of applications as tires, in door seals, as axle boots, in fuel hoses, or as assorted seals in the engine compartment.
Requirements Elastomers, like all organic chemicals, are not subject to unlimited use. External influences, e.g., different media, oxygen or ozone as well as pressure and temperature, alter the material properties and hence their behavior. Elastomers can swell, shrink, harden, crack, or even break.
Applications The matching sealing system is designed in line with the prevailing requirements. An overview of the existing solutions and where they are used is provided in Figure 2.
14 11 12 13 1 2 3 4 5 6 8 7 9 10 8 Electrics Customized housing cover  made of thermoplastic  material or in combination  with silicone 1 Air conditioning system O rings PTFE seals Rotary seals 3 Cylinder head Metal gaskets Multi layer seals 7 Safety relevant components Customized  two component parts 6 Battery Elastomer  pressure limiting  valve 11 Brake system O rings Customer specific molded parts 5 Exhaust gas  recirculation EGR seal 9 Electronic control units Specially developed multi layer seals 4 Fuel injection system O rings Customer specific  sealing rings PTFE molded rings 10 Engine, transmission, steering, among others sealing caps 2 Heat management Special rotary seals Multi component seals Sealing rings O rings PTFE components 14 Chassis systems Sealing edge ring O rings Buffer ring Back up rings Vane seal 13 Windows and doors Extruded elastomer sections 12 Drivetrain and transmission Rotary seals Guide rings Back up rings O rings Sealing washers Sealing caps
O ring: With the O ring, design engineers are provided with an efficient and economic sealing element for a huge variety of different applications. It is used primarily as a static sealing element, but can also be used in dynamic applications. Cost effective manufacturing processes and easy handling make the O ring the most commonly used seal.
Description O rings are continuously vulcanized in molds. They are characterized by their ring shape with a circular cross section. The O ring is defined in its dimensions by the inside diameter d1 and the cross section d2 .
Applications O rings are used as primary sealing elements, as tensioning elements for rubber energized hydraulic seals, and as wipers . They therefore cover a huge range of applications.
superimposed by the system pressure. : This creates a total sealing pressure, which increases as the system pressure increases , which can cause the O ring to be destroyed.
Depending on the application, the following values, referred to the cross section , are recommended for the pre pression: for dynamic use 6 to 20 %, for static use 15 to 30 %.
0 1.78 2.65 3.53 5.33 O ring cross section 1.78 2.65 3.53 5.33 6.99 mm 5 10 15 20 25 % % Pre pression 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Pre pression a b SAM0162 1Y SAM0163 1E SAM0164 1E
diagrams in Figure 8 and Figure 9. These : taken into account in accordance with ISO 3601 2 the dependence on loads and the cross section.
Surfaces Elastomers adapt to irregular surfaces under pressure. For gasor liquid tight connections, however, minimum demands must be made of the surface quality of the surfaces to be sealed. Basically, for instance, scores, scratches, shrink holes, and concentric or spiral machining marks are not permitted.
Dynamic mating faces are subject in terms of surface quality to more stringent demands than static seals. There are as yet no standardized definitions for describing mating faces. The specification of the Ra value is in practice not sufficient to assess the surface quality. Manufacturer recommendations therefore contain different terms and definitions among others in accordance with DIN 4768 .
General technical data O rings can be used in a wide range of applications. Temperature, pressure and media determine the choice of suitable materials. To be able to assess the suitability of the O ring as a sealing element for a given application, it is necessary to consider the interaction of all the operating parameters. Further information can also be obtained in the calculation program for O rings of Trelleborg Sealing Solutions .
Speed Speed In backand forward moving usage speeds of up to 0.5 m/s are permitted, in the case of rotating seals also up to 0.5 m/s. This applies in each case depending on material and application.
O ring cross section 1.78 2.65 3.53 5.33 6.99 mm 6.99 mm O ring cross section 0 1.78 2.65 3.53 5.33 5 10 15 20 25 % Pre pression % 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Pre pression a b SAM0165 1E
Media Media Virtually all liquids, gases and chemicals can be sealed with a large variety of materials with different properties. Details on the choice of suitable materials can be found elsewhere . Further information can be found on the Internet, e.g, in the Chemical Compatibility database .
oiled? Media compatibility with elastomer must be ensured. It is recommended to use the medium to be sealed for lubrication. No lubricants with solid additives may be used.
An installation oriented design can eliminate potential causes of seal failure . Since O rings are always installed with interference, lead in chamfers and edge roundings must be provided.
Installation over threads, shafts, and : Installation over threads, shafts, and similar similar If the O ring has to be guided during installation over threads, shafts, keyways or similar, a mounting sleeve will be required. This should not have any sharp edges or burrs and can be made of soft metal or plastic.
of the cross section d2 . The surface roughness of the lead in chamfer is specified as: Rz <= 6.3 mm; Ra <= 0.8 mm.
Installation types and information on installation space design Installation types Installation types O rings can be used in a variety of applications in components. The subsequent fitting situation must already be taken into account in the design. Sharp edges and bores should be circumvented so as to avoid damage during fitting. In the case of long sliding movements, the seal seat must if possible be stepped or the O rings arranged in such a way that they only cover short mounting distances. Otherwise there is the risk of twisting.
The O ring size in the case of piston seals .
Axial installation . For internal pressure the O ring outside diameter should chosen as being equal to or greater than the groove outside diameter d7. For external pressure the O ring inside diameter should be chosen as being less than the groove inside diameter d8.
tions between 2 % and 5 % and for static : applications between 2 % and 8 %. In the case of O rings with an inside diameter d1 < 20 mm it is not always possible to maintain this, which can result in a larger elongation range. To minimize the elongation range and the maximum stretching, it is necessary to minimize the diameter in the groove base d3 and to impose less stringent demands on minimum stretching.
In dynamic applications it is important not to exceed a maximum elongation of 5 % so as to avoid detrimental effects on the sealing function. Basically, exceeding these recommended values will lead to a greater reduction of the O ring cross section, which as a result may impact on the service life of the O ring.
to or greater than the outside diameter of the installation space so as to achieve upsetting of the O ring outside diameter. The outside diameter of the O ring should for O rings with a diameter d1 > 250 mm not exceed 3 % of the groove outside diameter and 5 % for O rings with a diameter d1 < 250 mm. For O rings with a diameter d1 < 20 mm, this is not always possible on account of the tolerance position, which may result in greater upsetting of the outside diameter. Basically, exceeding these recommended values will lead to a marked increase in the O ring cross section, which as a result may impact on the service life of the O ring.
of the O ring is equal to or slightly greater  than the groove outside diameter d7. For external pressure the O ring should be approximately 1 to 3 % smaller than the groove inside diameter d8.
Back up rings Back up rings Back up rings have no sealing functions, but, as the name suggests, are protective and supporting elements made of extrusion resistant materials with a predominantly rectangular cross section. They are installed together with an elastomer seal, as a rule with an O ring, into a groove for static application. The close fit between back up ring and bore or rod prevents the O ring, which is under pressure, from extruding into the sealing gap.
Engine components and add on parts are increasingly being manufactured from plastics. Owing to the lower rigidity levels, plastic components are subject to greater deformation than metal components .
variables for a sealing system. It depicts a molded seal for sealing between housing and cover. The system's requirements profile can be divided into the following stress types: mechanical , thermal, and electrical.
Design features Design features When it comes to the design features, the installation space  is matched under the criteria of compression and the clearance examination to the installation space.
a b c SAM0206Y SAM0207 1E Surface texture % compression Radii and flank angles Seal profile Sealing gap Partition webs Identification Retaining nubs Supplementary functions Design features Tolerances Flatness 1 A1 A2
Additional functions can also be used on : the molded part. Consequently, retaining nubs are used to provide transport retention for example during fitting, an identification for traceability, and partition webs for locating a leak.
The overview in Figure 3 shows the relationship between gap dimension and sealing gap. The gap dimension Tg is the sum of the component tolerances consisting of flatness of groove base TEn and counter sealing face TEg, the bushing protrusion TB and the entire widening and bending up TA . If a sealing gap Hd is present in the design, this must be taken into account in the configuration of the compression.
Finite element method Finite element method The finite element method is a numeric analysis method for obtaining estimates for complex technical problems and the geometry are known precisely. For example, the overall elongation of a seal can be determined after installation at room temperature and a defined overpressure. The results are shown in graphic form with the areas with differing elongation being colorized.
Tolerance flatness counter sealing face TEg Tolerance flatness  groove base TEn Total tolerance gap dimension Tg Tolerance  deformation THv Height  sealing gap THd SAM0208 1E b c a SAM209Y
Flat seals: Application Flat seals and their limits of use are very much dependent on the material used. Here, the applications vary in vehicle manufacturing from hot fluids, through strong chemical stress, to high pressures. Depending on the requirement, the flat seal can be sheathed in metal or even made up entirely of metal.
Variants As the above list shows, there is a large variety of flat seals. Only the most important of this will be discussed in the following.
Cylinder head gaskets Cylinder head gaskets Cylinder head gaskets are fundamental static seals in the engine compartment. The complex flat seal as a rule consists of one or more coated metal layers with the possibility of having elastomer areas vulcanized on. The cylinder head gasket not only seals against combustion gas, oil and coolant, but also acts as a power transmission element between the cylinder head and the crankcase.
Soft material seals Soft material seals Soft material seals made of elastomer fiber composite materials are, in terms of their basic principle, some of the oldest seals. They depend first and foremost on the quality of their fibers and are very pressureand temperature resistant. They are used for example as intake manifold seals and in exhaust gas recirculation valves. Natural rubber, NBR, SBR, CR, HNBR and FKM are used as binders in elastomer bonded soft material seals. For higher stresses simply flat seals with expanded graphite or pure metal gaskets can be used.
Metal bead gaskets Metal bead gaskets In the case of narrow sealing webs or low surface pressure, a good solution is to use metal bead gaskets . The surface pressure is reduced on account of the beads to a linear pressure. This allows a higher surface pressure with consistent screw force. An elastomer coating applied to the carrier plate also facilitates the micro sealing effect.
ble and at the same time adaptable seal : consists of a thin metal layer with vulcanized on elastomer layer . Stamped into complex geometries, the seal is ideal for use in primary frictional connection. With an elastomer layer thickness of at least 0.2 mm, it also offers the opportunity of compensating for shrink holes and pores in the casting. The elastomer metal flat seal is used in flange joints, pumps, automatic transmissions, and electric motors.
Sealing caps Application Sealing caps belong to the group of static seals. They facilitate the reliable sealing of assemblyor production related bores at various points in the engine compartment. Design engineers can always choose between the standard solution according to DIN 443 and other special types which meet the high requirements of the automotive industry.
The standard solution according to DIN 443 describes a cap made of metal which is generally pressed into the housing and provides secure sealing only by means of an additional adhesive connection. Set against these caps are sealing caps, which have an elastomer layer and do not required any additional adhesives. The elastomer layer furthermore facilitates installation without damaging the housing surface and thereby prevents micro leak paths.
Technology Metal sealing caps are worked in a deep drawing process from the coil material into the finished product. The favorable elastomer metal sealing caps can be manufactured in different ways. Possible production processes are compression molding, injection molding, lamination or vulcanization. One innovative production process involves the technology whereby multiple layer rubber metal connections are produced, and then stamped and deep drawn as composite material .
The process of applying a binder to metal carriers and vulcanizing elastomers on metal creates secure and solid connections which can be fashioned into complex seal geometries. In this way, flat seals, seals with metal frames for automated handling, friction optimized guide bands, and housing gaskets and sealing caps can be specifically produced.
production, enabling the cycle times in : assembly to be reduced and the production process to be fashioned in a more process reliable way. Users gain cost advantages through simpler handling, the possibility of automation in assembly, and reduced logistics expenditure. There are cost reduction potentials, particularly in respect of injection molded sealing caps. Examples in practice Engine blocks are produced by sand casting. At the end of the production process, the engine block features a number of bore holes which cannot be avoided from a production standpoint, but must nevertheless be sealed. Rubber metal sealing caps offer an ideal solution to this since they are easily mounted, not bonded, and rustproof. The installation situation is pictured in Figure 4.
There are further possible uses in the form of static sealing of bore holes in the transmission and in steering systems. But rubber metal sealing caps are also used in practice in the camshaft housing and crankcase and in pumps.
Variants Rubber metal sealing caps can be manufactured from different materials. Steel, galvanized steel and stainless steel may be used as metal materials. Possible elastomer materials are NBR, EPDM and AEM, and hence provide for a temperature range of 45 to 150 degC and different media resistance capabilities.
Radial shaft seal: Application Radial shaft seals are ring shaped sealing elements the purpose of which is to separate permanently and safely from each other oil or grease from the inside and, for example, dirt, dust or water from the outside. Radial shaft seals are used in drive systems , pumps, electric motors, and in machine building.
the diaphragm . The sealing edge is the area of the sealing lip that touches the shaft and assumes the actual sealing function.
The sealing lip geometry corresponds to today's state of the art and is based on many years of application technology experience. The sealing edge can be press finished or manufactured at the face by mechanical cutting.
The entire radial force of the seal is created by the initial force of the elastomer sealing lip and the tensile force of the spring. The former is obtained depending on deformation from the elasticity of the material, the sealing lip geometry, and the overlap between the shaft and the seal. Specifically for the automotive industry the function and application related information regarding radial shaft seals are described in DIN 3761 .
Seal design Standard types Standard types Radial shaft seals are available in standard types according to DIN 3760 and DIN 3761 or ISO 6194. Figure 2 shows versions in which the strengthening ring is completely enclosed in elastomer and versions in which the strengthening ring is embedded in elastomer only in the area of the diaphragm and consequently forms the casing of the shaft seal .
seal 1 Tension spring, 2 Spring retaining lip,  3 Sealing lip, 4 Spring groove,  5 Sealing edge, 6 Shaft, 7 Outer casing,  8 Elastomer, 9 Back casing,  10 Strengthening ring,  11 Diaphragm ,  12 Dust lip, 13 Spring plane.
a) DIN 3760 Type A,   b) DIN 3760 Type AS c) DIN 3761 Type B,   d) DIN 3761 Type BS e) DIN 3761 Type C,   f) DIN 3761 Type CS SAM0186 2Y 12 6 13 4 1 2 5 11 10 9 8 B A 7 3 a c e b d f
instead of oil as the medium to be sealed, : or increased dirt accumulation. It is recommended to use a special seal in all these situations. Figure 3 shows some special types by way of example.
Main features The main features to be observed in any choice of seal is the outer casing, the strengthening ring, the tension spring, and the material.
Metal strengthening ring Metal strengthening ring Cold rolled sheet steel in accordance with DIN EN 10139 ) may come into play.
a) Types with semi rubberized outside diameter, b) Rotary seals without tension spring, c) Type for medium to high pressures, d) Types for medium pressures, e) Cassette seals, f) System shaft seals. a b d c e f
Tests have shown that the radial force must be different depending on size range and sealing ring type. It has also emerged from these tests that it is very important to keep the deviations of radial force during the life of the seal within tight limits. The radial force has been established by comprehensive laboratory tests.
 the pre tension can be regulated in such a way that the envisaged radial force is achieved for the respective shaft diameter.
For cost reasons, good workability is desirable as an additional property. None of the materials available today can satisfy all these requirements. The choice of material therefore always constitutes a compromise between the relative importance of the respective factors.
Materials for sealing conventional media Material designation NBR FKM ACM VMQ HNBR Material code N V A S M Max. permissible continuous temperature ) Oil water emulsion 70 60 70 Water oil emulsion 70 60 70 Aqueous solution 70 70 Anhydrous fluids 150 Other media Heating fuel oils 90 100 Water 90 100 100 Suds 90 100 100 Air 100 200 150 200 130 NBR Nitrile butadiene rubber, FKM Fluorine rubber, ACM Acrylate rubber, VMQ Silicone rubber. HNBR Hydrogenated nitrile butadiene rubber.
Design of shaft and bore Surface texture, hardness and machining Surface texture, hardness and machining method method The shaft design is of crucial importance both to the seal and to the service life . Basically, the higher the circumferential speeds the greater the hardness of the shaft should be. It is established in DIN 3760 that the shaft must exhibit a hardness of at least 45 HRC. As the circumferential speed increases, the demand for hardness rises, and at 10 m/s a hardness of 60 HRC is required.
Friction and temperature measurements have also shown that grinding the shaft is the best machining method. Spiral grinding marks can however cause a pumping effect and leakage, which is why plunge cut grinding should be chosen. Whole number conditions of wheel speed to workpiece speed must be avoided here. Polishing the contact surface with emery cloth produces a surface texture which causes higher friction and temperature build up than plunge cut grinding.
In some cases it is not possible to furnish a shaft with the hardness, surface quality and corrosion resistance required for the seal. However, this problem can be solved by fitting a separate sleeve on the shaft. In the event of wear, only the sleeve has to be replaced.
Radial run out Radial run out Radial run out of the shaft is to be avoided wherever possible or kept within the tightest limits. At high rotational speeds the sealing lip is at risk of not being able to follow the shaft due to its inertia. The shaft seal must be arranged in direct proximity to the bearing .
d1 Diameter of shaft, tolerance h11, d3 Inside diameter of chamfer, R Radius, Rz Average peak to valley height, p  Pressure of medium, y, z Direction of installation.
Housing bore for the shaft seal Housing bore for the shaft seal The housing dimensions are shown in Table 4 and Figure 7. The tolerances for the metric sizes comply with DIN 3761 or ISO 6194 so that a good press fit is achieved for a tolerance in the housing bore with ISO H8. For the imperial sizes  the tolerances conform to the American standards. In installation cases where the housing bore has a different tolerance, the seal can be manufactured with a matching interference. A special fit between the seal and the bore may be required for housing bores of soft material, e.g., light alloy, in common with bearing housings with thin walls. The tolerances for seal and bore must in such cases by defined by practical tests.
If a part, e.g., a bearing, is pressed by the seal seat, this can be damaged. To avoid such damage, the seal must be chosen with a larger outside diameter than that of the bearing.
SAM0190 1E Shaft diameter 50 100 150 200 250 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 mm 0.4 Deviation in concentricity mm Shaft speed 2000 4000 6000 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 mm Radial run out rpm NBR, ACM, FKM VMQ SAM0191E
For metal caged seals : or required gas tightness, a good scoring free, flat finish surface quality is required. If the radial shaft seal is glued in the housing, it must be ensured that no adhesive comes into contact with the sealing lip or the shaft.
Removal and replacement Generally speaking, the removal of seals does not pose any difficulties. A screwdriver or similar is usually sufficient to remove them. The seal is damaged in this process. After a machine has been repaired or overhauled, new radial shaft seals should always be fitted, even if the old seals still appear to be intact.
3 3 F F F F F 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 Bore d2 H8 b2 10...20deg b1 r2
Usage parameters Overpressure Overpressure If the sealing cup is subjected to overpressure, it is pressed against the shaft, increasing the contact area of the sealing lip against the shaft. This increases friction and heat build up. At overpressure, therefore, the guide values for the maximum permissible circumferential speed are not applicable, but instead these must be decreased in proportion to the intensity of the pressure. At high circumferential speeds, however, already overpressures of 0.01 to 0.02 MPa can cause problems. By using an additional back up ring, it is possible to use the DIN types A, AS, C and CS pictured in Figure 2 above 0.05 MPa. The separate back up ring is to be adapted to the back face of the sealing cup. It should not however rest on the sealing cup while there is no overpressure applied. The back up ring must be adjusted to fit as accurately as possible. In type TRU the strengthening ring is fashioned in such a way that it supports the sealing cup . Type TRP has a short and sturdy sealing lip which permits an overpressure without additional support. When a back up ring is installed or when thrust rings are used, overpressures of 0.4 to 0.5 MPa can be permitted at moderate circumferential speeds.
medium to be sealed for supported radial shaft seals and for pressure seals a) Diagram, b) Type TRU, c) Type TRP/6CC, d) Type TRA/CB with back up ring.
at zero pressure acc. to DIN 3761 SAM0194 1E 00 25 50 75 100 150 200mm 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 30000 10000 5000 7000 4000 m s  Peripheral velocity Shaft diameter d1 Speed in rpm NBR NBR materials materials ACM ACM materials materials VMQ and FKM VMQ and FKM materials materials NBR materials ACM materials VMQ and FKM materials a b c d Shaft speed 6000 4000 2000 rpm 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 MPa Pressure dia. 25 mm dia. 50 mm dia. 150 mm dia. 100 mm SAM0193 1E
be taken into account and may not be exceeded. The bend demonstrates that larger shaft diameters permit higher circumferential speeds than smaller shaft diameters. This is because there is greater heat dissipation as the shaft cross section increases.
Friction losses Friction losses Friction loss is often of a magnitude that must be taken into account. This applies particularly when lower power output is transmitted. Friction loss is influenced by the following factors: Seal design and seal material, spring force, rotational speed, temperature, medium, shaft design, and lubrication.
losses in watts are caused by a radial shaft seal without protective lip when it is installed according to the manufacturer's technical directions. In certain cases the friction loss can be reduced by special sealing lip design. Decreasing the spring force or using a special rubber quality can also achieve the same result. In this connection it must be noted that the friction loss during the seal's "breaking in period" is greater than that shown in Figure 11. The standard breaking in period is a few hours.
seal, type TRA m s  00 5 10 15 20 50 100 150 200 250 300 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 200 150 100 125 W Friction loss Circumferential speed Shaft diameter in mm
Pneumatic seals: Sealing against compressed air entails a variety of challenges, which are faced with pneumatic valves. Different factors from those relevant to hydraulic seals come to the fore.
As a rule, pneumatic applications are operated with an air pressure of 0.8 to 1.0 MPa, in exceptional cases up to 1.6 MPa, and for high pressure valves sometimes even up to 5.0 MPa. Speeds are in the range of 0.2 to 1.0 m/s, and in special applications up to 5.0 m/s.
Leakage, friction and lubrication The leakage of air plays a subordinate role. Friction has a much greater influence on the power output of a pneumatic application. Lubrication is therefore very important. Since the use of oiled air is declining, most pneumatic sealing systems are lubricated with grease on a one off basis during installation. This lubrication must be maintained over the entire service life. One resulting requirement imposed on a pneumatic seal is hence that the lubricating grease is not wiped in the application. There are therefore differences, when compared with hydraulic seals, in the geometry of the sealing edge and the resulting pressure path.
Piston seals Piston seals Piston seals are as a rule "internal" seals and ensure that a pneumatic cylinder can move in that they prevent the medium from overrunning. Piston seals are seated on the moving component and are for the most part double acting, i.e. the seal acts in both directions. It seals when the piston moves to the left and when it moves to the right. This is often manifested in a symmetrical profile.
Rod seal Rod seal Rod seals are as a rule "external" seals and ensure that no medium can escape to the atmosphere. Rod seals are seated in the housing and are for the most part single acting. The seals acts only in one direction, with these frequently being manifested in an asymmetrical profile. Dirt wipers Dirt wipers Dirt wipers protect the system against dirt, foreign particles, swarf, and moisture. This prevents premature failure of the components. Singleand double acting wipers are used, depending on the application and sealing system.
Cushioning seal Cushioning seal Cushioning valves damp the impact of the piston and also assume the function of a non return valve.
Guide band Guide band Guide bands guide the piston and the rod. They accommodate radial forces, absorb vibrations, and prevent metal to metal contact.
cylinder with piston seal and rod seal 1 Cylinder barrel, 2 Piston seal,  3 Guide band, 4 Piston seal,  5 Piston extension, 6 O ring, 7 Piston rod,  8 Rod seal.
Design types: Aside from classic profile seals such as the O ring or the X ring, there are also standard sealing elements for pneumatics. Figure 2 shows some of these seals. Beyond simple sealing elements the trend is towards the assembly such that complete pistons are already used in many applications .
Elastomer seals Elastomer seals Elastomer materials are, thanks to their cost effectiveness, the main material used in the production of pneumatic seals. Simply fitting is a positive side effect. Challenges for elastomer seals can be presented by high abrasion.
Polyurethane seals Polyurethane seals As belonging to the family of elastomers, polyurethane must be considered separately. As an abrasion resistant and flexible material, it is often classified between elastomers such as NBR, FKM and PTFE. PTFE seals PTFE seals Compared with elastomers, PTFE is frequently not cost effective because of the manufacturing process involved. It does however offer advantages in conditions of high pressure, wear and friction when there is no lubrication.
Applications Pneumatic components are used in practically every branch of industry. They feature most strongly in automation engineering or process automation. Here, pneumatic units are used among others for gripping, turning, separating, suction or driving. These components ensure highly efficient, precise and economical production and assembly systems. Open and closed loop control is performed by pneumatic cylinders and valves.
Another area of application is commercial vehicles . Here they are used in the drive, chassis and suspension, and transmission, in among others non return valves, pressure control valves, and switching valves. Cylinders are used in these sectors for example for the precise control of throttle valves. But pneumatic systems are being used with increasing regularity in other sectors such as biosciences, the food and drinks industries, the chemical process industry, and the electronics industry.
standard cylinders a) Rod seal, single acting, b) Piston seal, single acting, c) Cushioning seal, d) Rod seal wiper combination  .
Basic principles There are various process technologies which can be used in the manufacture of multi component molded parts. All production technologies are based on the same production process, which works with two or more injection units; however, an explicit distinction is made here between the single stage process and the two stage process.
Single stage process Single stage process In the single stage process the premolded part is transported by a handling unit from one side to the other station in the mold. The later multi component molded part is now either ejected by means of a mold movement is used here.
Two stage process Two stage process In the twoor multi stage process one of the components can even be made of metal with engineers currently endeavoring to replace metal parts as much as possible with technical plastics and hence to achieve a weight reduction. The twoor multi stage process is performed by way of at least two closing units and hence on two autarkic machines or tools. Here too the insertion parts or premolded parts are inserted into the designated cavities of the respective mold and ejected by mold movement or deposited by a handling unit or a robot on a cavity specific basis.
Process technologies A distinction can basically be made in the process technologies between processes with separate contours, components or with contours that run into each other or components.
Composite injection molding Composite injection molding In the case of composite injection molding the combinations should exhibit good chemical adhesion to each other, such as for example a seal to technical components.
Assembly injection molding Assembly injection molding Here material combinations that exhibit no chemical adhesion to each other are chosen, since otherwise the function of the component is no longer assured.
Sandwich injection molding or Sandwich injection molding or co injection co injection technique technique In this process different material properties are combined with each other, e.g., a rigid outer skin with a foamed core; therefore there does not necessarily have to be adhesion.
Multi color injection molding Multi color injection molding Here the same material is processed in different colors in one component .
Fill simulation  In all the processes mentioned and the design of molds, fill simulation is today one of the most important aids in the field of multi component injection molding. It delivers detailed results and shows how problems can be avoided across the full injection molding process. It provides useful information on pressure and temperature distribution and on possible positions of air pockets and joint lines in the component to be produced. In this way, potential flaws in molded parts and molds can in a fill simulation already be detected and eliminated in the development phase. By detecting these potential flaw sources early, it is possible already at an early stage to eliminate the potential cost drivers in multi component injection molded parts.
Tool techniques Rotary table Rotary table The rotary table is as a rule located between the closing side mold half and the clamping plate. In this way it is possible to place components from a first cavity into a second cavity. First the material is injected into a first cavity . This can be performed for example by a plate in the mold.
a) Simultaneous filling of both cavities. b) Finished part is ejected, turning of the rotary table on the machine plate including the pre molded part.
Turnstiles and turning cores: Turnstiles and turning cores Instead of turning the complete closing side mold half, in this solution only an intermediate plate in the mold is turned with the pre molded part.
Transfer technique or Transfer technique or insertion technique insertion technique With the transfer or insertion technique the pre molded part is transferred or inserted, via a gripper robot or by hand, from one cavity to the other . The second material is then injected here. Transfer technique also refers to the manu facture of the pre molded part on a machine, removal and insertion in a second machine, and hence a two stage process.
Core back technique offers the opportunity of manufacturing two component parts without having to open the mold. The first plastic is injected while the cavity for the second component is kept sealed by a sliding insert in the mold. Once this injection process has finished, the sealed cavity can be opened and the second component processed after the slide is actuated. On contact of the second material the contact surface temperature can be monitored and adjusted much more effectively with this process than with rotating tool systems.
a) Simultaneous filling of both cavities. b) Finished part and pre molded part are removed or inserted by the handling unit. b a b a
Rod and piston sealing : systems Hydraulic rod seals Elements Elements A rod sealing system as a rule consists of five elements . A further interaction can arise for example between the sealing element and the rod. If the rod surface is too rough, wear will occur on the sealing element, possibly on the wiper, and on the guide band. This wear results in leakage, even though the seal is not the cause of this.
Design Design Rod seals are asymmetrical seals whose profile is optimized by a sealing edge in such a way that they can as effectively as possible wipe the medium to be sealed from the rod and hence provide a seal. The choice of sealing element is primarily dependent on pressure, required friction, temperature, media resistance, viscosity, lubricity, and price. The following general rule can be formulated: If the price and not the friction at medium pressures is the dominating factor and liquids of normal viscosity and lubricity are involved, elastomer grooved rings or polyurethane  can be used. If, on the other hand, low friction or higher pressures are required, PTFE sealing edge rings are to be recommended. The same applies in the case of high viscosity or poor lubricity.
PTFE seals are activated by an elastomer energizing element usually an O ring since PTFE has no rubber elastic properties. It does however have very low friction and high dimensional stability. PTFE sealing edge rings do not wipe the hydraulic fluid out of the rod surface topography as well as elastomer and PU seals. They should for this reason exhibit sufficiently good back pumping behavior, i.e. they should have the capacity to delivery a lubricant layer of a few molecule layers drawn out during the advance stroke back against the primary pressure into the pressure chamber during the return stroke. Thanks to this behavior, PTFE seals have the advantage of always running on a few molecule layers, which increases their service life. In contrast, PU and elastomers wipe the fluid from the surface in order to be tight. They exhibit only limited back pumping capacity. On account of the lubricated extension and retraction and the low friction coefficient, the seal is prevented from squeaking or humming much more effectively than PU or elastomer seals.
Elastomers or PU can be used as materials for wipers. In exceptional cases PTFE can be used if substances permanently adhered to the rod are to be wiped. Even for wipers which do not come into contact with the hydraulic fluid, it is important to ensure media resistance on account of the draw out lubricant layer of the rod seal .
values. The media compatibility of PTFE is assured in most cases; only the resistance of the extenders has to be checked. These types of rings and bands can support medium transverse forces. For higher transverse forces a number of rings can be used or a thermoplastic .
Hydraulic fluids Hydraulic fluids Hydraulic fluids are for the most part specified. They should not contain any solid particles. These can reach between seal, guide, wiper or rod surfaces and damage or mark both the elements mentioned and the rod surface; this will then cause leakage. Lubricity and viscosity must be taken into account in the choice of seal.
Rod surface Rod surface A hardened or chromium plated or even otherwise hard coated surface with a lead in chamfer of approximately 10 to 15deg which upsets the sealing element to such an extent that it can pass through the bore diameter and snap into the groove.
A PU hose or an axially slotted tube can be used to push the seal into the cone. Subsequent calibration by a rod with a large diameter if possible and a lead in chamfer of less than 15deg are required at least for PTFE seals. The outside diameter of the lead in chamfer should smaller than the seal diameter to be calibrated. The calibration is for the most part carried out with the original piston rod, on which a calibrating tip is attached. It is important here that it has a burr free transition from the tip to the rod which has not sharp edges and thus does not damage the seal. The surface of the calibrating tip or the calibrating tool should have the same surface quality as that of the rod.
Installation by compression of PTFE seals, as is sometimes suggested in industrial applications, must be avoided in automotive applications in that permanent deformation of the seals cannot be ruled out. A split groove must be provided if installation by compression is not possible.
Hydraulic piston seals : Seal, guide, medium, surface Seal, guide, medium, surface The same applies by extension to piston sealing systems as to rod sealing systems. Normally, piston sealing systems have no wipers. This function is at least assumed in part by piston guide rings or piston bands. Piston seals are as a rule not subject to the same high tightness requirements as rod sealing systems, which must keep oil safely away from the atmosphere.
Pistons seals are to exhibit equally good tightness in both directions of movement. For this reason, they have a symmetrical cross section for the most part. Alternatively two grooved rings back to back must be used.
One interesting solution is a PTFE piston seal, which activates a sealing edge in each case as a function of the applied pressure. The pressure allows the seal to tilt in such a way that an edge is formed depending on the pressure direction and thereby can operate like a rod seal.
Piston guidance Piston guidance The same principles as for rod sealing systems and rod guides apply to the choice of the right piston guide rings or guide bands. It proved to be advantageous to place a guide ring or guide band on either side . Hydraulic fluids Hydraulic fluids See here Hydraulic fluids for rod sealing systems.
Piston surfaces Piston surfaces The same surface roughness and surface hardness figures apply to piston seals as to rod sealing systems. A non hardened, drawn or rolled surface can also be used in special applications. Surface compression produces textures which allow the surface to become harder.
Installation of piston seals Installation of piston seals Piston seals can be stretched via a cone with a lead in chamfer of approximately 10 to 15deg onto the piston diameter if the elongation does not exceed 30 % of the inside diameter. The elongated seals then snaps into the groove. A PU hose or an axially slotted installation tool  can be used to push the seal into the cone. Subsequent calibration is required for PTFE seals. This can be done with a separate calibrating tool or with the cylinder itself. The calibration tool is a cylinder with a lead in chamfer of less than 15 deg and a bore diameter as close as possible to the piston diameter. The outside diameter of the lead in chamfer should be at least as large as the outside diameter of the seal to be calibrated. Both in relation to the calibration tool and the lead in chamfer on the cylinder it is important to ensure that the surface is as good as on the cylinder barrel so as to avoid damage to the sealing element. The transition from the calibration tool to the cylinder should be burr free and have no sharp edges.
Guides and guide bands Guide bands have two essential functions to perform in rod and piston sealing systems: Guiding the piston or rod precisely and if necessary accommodating transverse forces. Different materials can be used to perform these functions, e.g., bronze, composite materials, or extended PTFE materials. Bronze bushings must be additionally lubricated and are expensive. In the case of composite materials, different guides and guide bands are possible.
There are fabric reinforced duroplastic guide rings, which support a relatively high transverse force, but are not suitable for dry running and even when lubricated have a relatively high friction. The market also offers guides which have a slotted sheet metal ring on which bronze particles are sprayed and a PTFE layer is rolled in. These bushings offer outstanding guidance quality and low friction, but are at the expensive end of the spectrum. A further guidance option is provided by wire mesh bushings which are wrapped in PTFE and likewise have low friction.
Guide bands made of extended PTFE provide a popular and economical solution in vehicle manufacturing. They exhibit good friction, damp vibrations, and can support transverse forces up to a certain degree.
In the case of guides it must generally be : noted that they do not assume the function of a seal. For this reason, the two ends of the guide rings , it is important to ensure that no drag streams occur which are superimposed on the system pressure. A bypass may be required in these cases.
The thickness of guide bands depends on the diameter to be guided. The smaller the diameter, the harder it is to bend a thick band for example around a piston and hold it in position. Guide bands with thicknesses ranging from 0.85 to 2.5 mm are used in the automotive sector. The thinner the bands, the smaller their deformations under load and accordingly the better guidance quality they have. Refer to the relevant catalogs for calculation of the permissible load. PTFE materials extended to varying extents are available depending on application and medium.
Typical fields of application for guide bands are, for example, guiding the piston in a single tube shock absorber or guiding the rod or the piston in a positioning cylinder for translatory movements .
temperature and the change in volume after a storage period of 70 hours in the reference oil IRM 903. Figure 2 shows the operating temperature range. These temperature ranges apply to applications in which contact with media which act aggressively against the respective material is excluded.
Elastomers Generally speaking, the different elastomers can be roughly characterized as follows. The sequences of capital letters used for the elastomer ID codes are standardized in DIN ISO 1629  .
SAM0151 2E 0 0 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 325 20 40 60 80 120 140 % VMQ IIR SBR EPDM HNBR ACM NR CR NBR ECO AEM FVMQ FKM FFKM degC 1 1 Volume change Temperature 0 50 100 50 100 150 Temperature 200 250 300 AU / EU SBR IIR NBR HNBR CR ECO ACM AEM EPDM FVMQ FKM FFKM VMQ degC
ECO The particularity of ECO materials is their good resistance to engine oils and fuels as used in automobiles. Moreover, the extremely low gas permeability, the weather and ozone resistance, and the low compression set must be mentioned.
Because of its outstanding dynamic properties, ECO is used in vehicles particularly for engine bearings and vibration dampers. But ECO is also frequently used in fuel lines.
NBR , which can rang between 18 % and 50 %. This determines the oil resistance, which is however always contrary to the flexibility at low temperature.
They are used mainly in parts which come into contact with mineral oils and greases. However, the material also has good resistance to cooling water and to diesel fuel.
EPDM is frequently used in glycol based brake fluids, in cooling water, in refrigerant, and, due to its outstanding weather resistance, for example in door seals.
ACM materials are used as seal materials primarily because of their particular resistance to lubricating oils with high additive levels in highertemperature applications.
AEM Compared with ACM, AEM usually exhibits better mechanical properties, much better temperature resistance, and a very good compression set. Its operating tem 
AEM materials are, like ACM, used as static seals in the underhood area primarily because of their particular resistance to lubricating oils with high additive levels in higher temperature applications.
FKM Depending on their structure and fluorine content, fluorinated elastomers differ in their media resistance and flexibility at low temperature. Aside from their very good resistance to fuels, oils and other aggressive media, they are characterized by low gas permeability and very good ozone, weather and aging resistance.
FKM is used, because of its very good resistance to fuels, predominantly in applications such as fuel injectors, fuel lines, and the like.
It is important to mention the really high price of this elastomer group, which varies markedly depending on the polymer type used.
Characteristic data and testing : of elastomer materials Different properties are brought to bear depending on the use to which elastomers are put. To be able to assess the suitability of a material for a certain application, the custom is to conduct tests in advance which are meant to simulate the conditions in the later application. These tests are also intended to define or specify the properties of a material. Some of the most common test methods are described in the following.
Density Density Density must be considered as one of the most fundamental properties. This test is at a constant test temperature to a large extent not dependent on further parameters such as parts geometry or similar, which is why it tends to be used as a specific material constant as the first identification check in material tests. Usually the density is determined using the buoyancy method according to ISO 1183 1 in which the density is calculated from the measured weight in air and in a test liquid.
Compression set Compression set An important parameter for sealing performance is the compression set of the elastomer material under the influence of temperature. Elastomers demonstrate under load, as well as an elastic component, a permanent, plastic deformation . The greater the compression set value, the worse the elastic behavior of a material.
Common test specimens The compression set is determined according to DIN ISO 815 . A common test specimen is a cylindrical disk with a diameter of 13 mm and a height of 6.3 mm. The test can basically also be carried out with a suitable cross section on seals .
Common parameters The deformation is 25 %. The test temperature is chosen on the basis of the elastomer type. The test duration must be defined and is usually 24 h, 72 h, 168 h, or a multiple thereof.
Compressive stress relaxation Compressive stress relaxation This test, for example according to 3384 , is similar to the compression set test, but here it is not the recovery performance after stress relaxation that is measured but the specifically created counterforce in the compressed state that is determined. It requires much more technical apparatus to be measured, but has a much better correlation with the sealing force for static seals in the installed state.
Common parameters The deformation is 25 %. The test temperature is chosen on the basis of the elastomer type. The test duration must be defined and is usually 24 h, 72 h, 168 h, or a multiple thereof.
Test methods Two different methods may be used: In method A the deformation and all the counterforce measurements are made at test temperature. In method B the test specimens are stored at the test temperature, with the deformation and all the force measurements being made at room temperature.
______ F0  100 R Compressive stress relaxation after a specified time t, expressed as % of the initial counterforce, F0 Initial counterforce after 30 min, Ft  Counterforce after the specified test duration t.
Hardness Hardness The hardness is one of the most frequently mentioned properties of rubber materials. Nevertheless, the values can be very misleading. Hardness is the resistance of a body to the indentation of an indenting body of a specific shape under a defined compressive force.
The following also replies here: To be able to compare the results, it is absolutely essential to define all the parameters exactly. Because of these influencing variables, it is moreover not possible to compare the results obtained with a durometer directly with IRHD values.
Hardness tests according to Hardness tests according to Shore A Shore A and Shore D and Shore D The Shore A hardness tester .
For a thinner material it is permitted to use layers if the minimum specimen thickness is achieved with a maximum of three layers. None of the layers may be less than 2 mm thick.
Hardness tests according to Hardness tests according to IRHD IRHD Testing the ball indentation hardness according to IRHD .
Hardness values determined on finished part or specimens of other dimensions deviate as a rule from the values m,measured on standard specimens. This applies mainly in the case of curved surfaces. In order to avoid measuring errors, it is essential to position the measuring tip on curved surfaces at the highest point. In the event of very small cord thicknesses, positioning aids such as magnifying glasses, centering pins and automatic laser positioning can be used.
Testing of Testing of tensile stress strain properties tensile stress strain properties according to DIN 53504 This test serves to determine the typical mechanical characteristic values of an elastomer such as tensile strength, elongation at break and the stress values of test specimens of a particular shape when subjected to stress at constant speed up to break .
Stress value: The stress value s is the quotient from tensile force Fi available when a certain elongation is achieved and the initial cross section A0. Usually the value is specified at 100 %.
The test can basically also be carried out on O rings and is described accordingly. However, the results determined here are not directly comparable with the values of standardized tensile bars.
Common parameters The tests are generally carried out at the test temperature of 23 +2 degC. Often of interest are tests at increased or low temperature which are carried out in special tempering chambers.
Testing of Testing of tear propagation strength tear propagation strength according to DIN ISO 34 1 This test measures the force that is required to tear a specified test specimen either by continuing an already existing cut or through the full width of the test specimen.
Common test specimens Test specimens are tensile bars of different geometries which are stamped out of a 2 mm test plate. It must be noted that each test specimen leads to a completely different result, which is why only results of the absolutely identical method can be compared with each other.
Testing of Testing of media and temperature media and temperature resistance resistance Elastomers, like all organic materials, have a limited service life. External factors such as media, temperature, ozone and oxygen influence the material properties. Elastomers can swell, shrink, harden or even crack if they are used under the wrong conditions.
In order to check the suitability of an elastomer under different conditions, it is necessary to conduct compatibility tests according to DIN ISO 1817 in air. Media compatibility can be tested with standardized test medium or in concrete operating media from the application.
Common test specimens S2 tensile bars according to DIN 53504 are used as test specimens. The test can basically also be carried out on seals (e.g., O rings.
Common parameters The test temperature is chosen on the basis of the elastomer type. The test duration must be defined and is usually 24 h, 72 h, 168 h, or a multiple thereof.
Testing of : Testing of flexibility at low temperature flexibility at low temperature The properties of elastomers are very much influenced by temperature extremes. At high temperatures, the material may be subject to anything ranging from hardening to irreversible destruction. On the other hand, the material becomes rigid or hard and brittle at low temperature due to reduced chain mobility and loss of elasticity. This effect is reversible.
chanical Analysis): This can be used to determine the TR10 value; it describes the recovery of an elongated specimen at low temperature by 10 %, according to ASTM D1329 .
Mechanical Analysis): This can be used to determine the TR value  and further characteristic values.
As well as these analytical methods there is the possibility of determining the freezing temperature range of a material by means of simple bending tests or a hardness test.
To be able to compare results, it is essential to define clearly the following parameters: Temperature, ozone concentration, relative humidity, elongation, test duration, and test method.
Testing of Testing of rebound resilience rebound resilience Elastomers are never 100 % elastic; instead, their property is always composed of a viscous component and an elastic component.
The damping property is of interest for certain applications. This can be determined for example by way of the rebound resilience according to DIN 53512 , whereby a pendulum of defined mass  strikes a test specimen and the height reached after the impact is measured.
Maximum damping corresponds to a value of 0 %. Minimum damping could be at a value of 100 %, but this cannot be achieved.
 DIN 4768: Determination of values of surface roughness parameters R<sub>a</sub>, R<sub>z</sub>, R<sub>max</sub> using electrical contact instruments; concepts and measuring conditions.
 DIN EN 10088: Stainless steels. Part 1: List of stainless steels.
Part 3: Technical delivery conditions for semi finished products, bars, rods, wire, sections and bright products of corrosion resisting steels for general purposes. VDMA 24317: Fluid power systems Fire resistant pressure fluids Technical minimum requirements.
 DIN 51524: Pressure fluids Hydraulic oils.
Part 1: Testing at constant temperature. Part 2: Testing with temperature cycling. ISO 7619 1: Elastomers or thermoplastic elastomers Determination of indentation hardness.
 DIN 53504: Testing of rubber and elastomers Determination of tensile strength at break, tensile strength at yield, elongation at break and stress values in a tensile test.
 DIN 53504: Testing of rubber and elastomers Determination of tensile strength at break, tensile strength at yield, elongation at break and stress values in a tensile test.
Positive or form closed joints: Operation Positive or form closed joints have the task of transferring forces, which themselves maintain contact via mating surfaces, by means of their geometrical shape. The forces are always transferred perpendicularly to the mating surfaces, resulting mainly in compressive and shear stress .
Positive locking or form closure creates detachable connections, since as a rule a clearance or a transition fit exists are used for the torsion resistant connection of belt pulleys, gears, coupling hubs, etc. to shafts. Feather keys are sometimes used to secure frictional joints or to fix a specified position in the circumferential direction.
The cheaper Woodruff key , the round side of which fits into the shaft, is mainly used for this purpose in automotive construction and to transfer smaller torques.
In the case of feather key couplings, the groove faces lie against the feather key faces. In contrast to keyed joints, there is clearance between the rear of the feather key and the base of the groove. This means that the forces are transferred exclusively via the flanks of the feather key.
ltr 5  2 KA Mt _____________ d   n ph pperm .
straight faced ones , the contact surface ratio is ph 5 1, and with two feather keys, it is ph 5 0.75.
Shaft diameter d Width x height Groove depths Length over mm up to mm b x h mm t1 mm t2 mm l mm 6 8 2 x 2 1.2 1.0 6...20 8 10 3 x 3 1.8 1.4 6...36 10 12 4 x 4 2.5 1.8 8...45 12 17 5 x 5 3.0 2.3 10...56 17 22 6 x 6 3.5 2.8 14...70 22 30 8 x 7 4.0 3.3 18...90 30 38 10 x 8 5.0 3.3 22...110 38 44 12 x 8 5.0 3.3 28...140 44 50 14 x 9 5.5 3.8 36...160 50 58 16 x 10 6.0 4.3 45...180 58 65 18 x 11 7.0 4.4 50...200 65 75 20 x 12 7.5 4.9 56...220 75 85 22 x 14 9.0 5.4 63...250 85 95 25 x 14 9.0 5.4 70...280 95 110 28 x 16 10.0 6.4 80...320 Feather key lengths in mm: 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 25, 28, 32, 36, 40, 45, 50, 56, 63, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 125, 140, 160, 180, 200, 220, 250, 280, 320
that it does not require any additional sep : arator to transfer torque. The hub can be centered on the shaft over the smallest shaft diameter. This is called internal centering and very smooth running can thus be achieved.
The hub can also be centered via the flanks of the drivers or the toothing. This flank centering ensures very low circumferential backlash between shaft and hub and is therefore very suitable for alternating and jerky torques. As with the feather key, a rough design is drawn up based on surface pressure.
Bolt and pin connections Bolt and pin connections provide a simple and inexpensive means of connecting two or more components. These are among the oldest and most widely used types of connection.
and shear. Bending stress is negligible in most cases. It only occurs to a significant extent in the case of bolt connections which are relatively long in relation to their diameter.
Designation Standard Illustration Driver Centering Contact surface ratio Spline shaft ISO 14 Involute toothing Flanks ph 5 0.75 UAM0101 3Y UAM0101 2Y UAM0101 1Y
Permanent fits Sliding fits Material Mean  surface pressure Material pairing Mean  surface pressure static swelling pperm N/mm2 pperm N/mm2 pperm N/mm2 Gray cast iron 70 50 St / gray cast iron 5 S 235 180 120 St hard. / St hard.
______ s  )  <= pperm b1 b b1 F F d DN DW d pW,max Mt pN d s F pmax pd pb h UAM0102 3Y UAM0102 2Y UAM0102 1aY
Press fit Application Application For a press fit .
Because press fits are easy to produce and can transfer even jerky and variable torques and linear forces, they are suitable for the joints of cylindrical surfaces which do not have to be released afterwards . Cylindrical press fits are classed as hard to detach connections, since with high interference during removal the surfaces of shaft and bores are detrimentally affected.
Elastic design of cylindrical interference fits: Elastic design of cylindrical interference fits A press fit must be designed so that at least a minimum surface pressure pmin is present in order to ensure the transfer of the greatest occurring stress, and so that a maximum surface pressure pmax is not exceeded and the components are not overstressed.
1 Inner part . FR Frictional force, p Surface pressure, Mt Torque, b Hub width, DF Joining diameter, DIa Shaft outside diameter, DIi Shaft inside diameter, DAa Hub outside diameter, DAi Hub inside diameter. UAM0094 2Y DF FR p p Mt p a 2 1 2 b 1 DAi DAa b DIa DIi
peaks. According to DIN 7190 , the : smoothing of the two surfaces with 40 % of the averaged peak to valley heights RzI is taken into account in the calculation.
Heating Cooling Gray cast iron 0.24 100,000 10 8 Malleable cast iron 0.25 90,000 to 100,000 Steel 0.3 200,000 to 235,000 11 8.5 Bronze 0.35 110,000 to 125,000 16 14 Red brass 0.35 to 0.36 110,000 to 125,000 17 15 CuZn 0.36 80,000 to 125,000 18 16 MgAl8Zn AlMgSi 0.3 0.34 65,000 to 75,000 23 18
Tapered connection Application Application A tapered connection is suitable for transferring dynamic forces and torques. They are used predominantly to secure hubs to shaft ends, e.g. the V belt pulley on the alternator or the drill head in the drill spindle. Taper and taper angle are standardized, among others also connecting elements like the terminals on starter batteries, in DIN 254 .
Tapered connections for the most part can be retightened and easily detached. As a shaft hub connection they exhibit no shaft weakening and have very good centering .
Load excesses  is required to detach the connection. This means that a torque can be transferred even if the bolt is removed after the parts are axially stressed. In contrast, with a non self locking tapered connection, there is no pressure between the effective areas after the axial application force is released. The condition for self locking is: a __ 2 <= arctan ua.
Da Hub outside diameter, d1 Large taper diameter, d2 Small taper diameter, dm Middle taper diameter, l Common length, p Surface pressure, a Taper angle, Mt Torque, Fa Assembling force .
Table 5: Taper lock joints.: Designation Illustration Features Clamping sleeve Axial distortion is applied to enlarge the outside diameter of the clamping sleeve and reduce the inside diameter. The danger of loosening under dynamic loads is reduced by using long bolts.
Hydraulic hollow jacket spring collet Axial distortion is applied to generate a pressure in a thin walled hollow cylinder. The spring collet is self centering because of even pressure distribution, and thus has true running properties. At higher temperatures, the thermal expansion of the pressure fluid must be taken into account.
Tolerance ring Star washers are thin walled, very flat conical shells with radial slots. The axial initial force is translated by forced deformation into a fivefold to tenfold radial force. Star washers do not center.
Taper lock ring 1 Precentering Taper lock rings consist of two coaxially arranged conical rings. Radial prestressing is achieved by axially distorting the rings. Taper lock rings do not center. They are not self locking and thus can easily be detached.
Taper lock set Axial distortion is applied by means of the bolts belonging to the taper lock set. Taper lock sets are very true running and can transfer very large torques, particularly with multiple pairs of effective areas. 1 UAM0096 1Y UAM0096 2Y UAM0096 3Y UAM0096 4Y UAM0096 5Y UAM0096 6Y
n Number of bolts, F Force, FS Fastener force, FR Frictional force, FN Normal force, Mt Torque, lS Bolt lever arm, lN Hub center lever arm.
Self locking clamp joint Condition for self locking: l __ b  >= 1 ___ 2 u .
Circular keyed joint Circular keyed joint A new type of keyed joint is the 3 part circular key sectional profile  contains an appropriate number of corresponding keys in a cylindrical hole. Twisting results in radial distortion and this can transfer large axial and tangential forces in any direction.
As opposed to press fits, circular keyed joints are detachable. They are used, for example, for shaft hub connections, for camshafts and for hinges in vehicle construction.
Threaded fasteners: Basic principles Operation Operation A threaded fastener is used to make secure joints that are detachable any number of times. The purpose of screws and bolts is to stress the mating parts so that the static or dynamic operating forces acting on the joint do not cause any relative movement between the parts .
Calculations for threaded fasteners: Calculations for threaded fasteners The prevailing basis for calculating highstress threaded fasteners is VDI Directive 2230 . It can be used as a simple, sufficiently precise calculation of the forces and stresses in the thread and the required tightening and loosening torques for a cylindrical single threaded fastener, which can be considered as a section of a highly rigid multiple threaded fastener. This means that, in many cases, even complex multiple threaded fasteners can be considered as single threaded fasteners. The precondition for this is that the fastener axes are parallel to each other and perpendicular to the parting planes. The components must also be elastic.
Another important factor here is that only centrally preloaded and centrally stressed fasteners are considered. For large, eccentric stresses, which may cause the parting line to gape open, please refer to VDI 2230 .
The property class of a standard nut is identified by one number one number. This number corresponds to 1/100 of the minimum tensile strength of a bolt of the same property class. To optimize material exploitation, therefore, bolts and nuts of equal property classes should always be paired .
If the rigidities of fasteners and stressed parts are known .
Operating forces: Operating forces In the case of transversely stressed threaded fasteners , the forces are transferred in the parting plane by friction. Provided that the frictional forces, which are generated by the fastener preload, are greater than the operating forces to be transferred, the assembly load extension diagram does not change. This means that the fastener "notices" nothing about the external stress.
stressed parts is relieved. This hardens the spring rate RP of the stressed parts, since grip is reduced. The stressed parts are hammered onto the fastener, which then becomes apparently longer and therefore softer. Small n values therefore result in small additional fastener forces. This has a good impact on the fastener safety factor. However, the clamping force is reduced at the same time, and this is not good for the joint function.
RS a fSV fPV f RP F FV FSA FPA FA FK FS RS b fA f RP F UAM0089Y
n < 1 1 2 a a/2 FU FN FU FR FV FV d2 FR FN FN FN w w r 3 UAM0090 1Y UAM0091 1Y
In the case of self locking threads , the loosening torque becomes negative. This means that a torque must be applied in the opposite direction to the tightening action.
1.5) * d is maintained, a threaded fastener fails if overstressed, not because the thread turns are stripped, but because the cylindrical screw bolt ruptures.
permissible preload forces and tightening torques during assembly for different coefficients of friction at 90 % efficiency  of the standardized minimum yield point.
__________ p   <= pG.
8.8 10.9 12.9 8.8 10.9 12.9 8.8 10.9 12.9 8.8 10.9 12.9 M4 4.5 6.7 7.8 3.9 5.7 6.7 2.6 3.9 4.5 4.1 6.0 7.0 M5 7.4 10.8 12.7 6.4 9.4 11.0 5.2 7.6 8.9 8.1 11.9 14.0 M6 10.4 15.3 17.9 9.0 13.2 15.5 9.0 13.2 15.4 14.1 20.7 24.2 M8 19.1 28.0 32.8 16.5 24.3 28.4 21.6 31.8 37.2 34.3 50.3 58.9 M10 30.3 44.5 52.1 26.3 38.6 45.2 43 63 73 68 100 116 M12 44.1 64.8 75.9 38.3 56.3 65.8 73 108 126 117 172 201 M14 60.6 88.9 104.1 52.6 77.2 90.4 117 172 201 187 274 321 M16 82.9 121.7 142.4 72.2 106.1 124.1 180 264 309 291 428 501 M18 104 149 174 91.0 129 151 259 369 432 415 592 692 M20 134 190 223 116 166 194 363 517 605 588 838 980 M22 166 237 277 145 207 242 495 704 824 808 1151 1347 M24 192 274 320 168 239 279 625 890 1041 1011 1440 1685 M27 252 359 420 220 314 367 915 1304 1526 1498 2134 2497 M30 307 437 511 268 382 447 1246 1775 2077 2931 2893 3386
Threaded fastener locking devices: The spontaneous loosening of a threaded fastener is caused by complete or partial loss of preload, which in turn is caused by settling events .
Total contact stress equals the sum of individual component parts. However, contact stress determined in this way is only valid if the surface pressure limits are not exceeded. Otherwise, significantly greater settling will arise. Locking devices are intended to reduce or compensate for settling.
pressure limit pG as per VDI 2230 Material Surface pressure limit pG in N/mm2 GD AlSi 9 Cu 3 S 235 J E 295 EN GJL 250 34 CrNiMo 6 290 490 710 850 1,080
; nominal dimensions. Nut Bolt H1 h3 d3 d2 P D2 D1 H D d H 2 H 2 H 6 H 4 H 8 60deg 60deg R Thread dimensions in mm UAM0041E
 Thread axis 90deg UAM0044Y UAM0045E
Snap on connections : on plastic components Features Snap on connections are a cheap and efficient way of fitting plastic components. They are used to connect housing halves, on plug connectors, and to secure mounting parts in plastic housings. They exploit the high expansibility of the plastics with relatively low rigidity.
All snap on connections are characterized by the brief excursion of a resilient element in the joining process before it snaps into place behind a locating lug. Depending on the configuration of the joining angles at the snap on elements, it is possible to produce nondestructively detachable and nondetachable connections .
spring) Connected bending springs with locking element Annular spring Annular spring,  segmented Annular spring Designation  snap on hook Torsion  snap on hook Resilient  clip Ring snap on element Ring snap on connection Spherical  snap on element Type A Stop against overextension of the torsion axis. B Button side for releasing the torsion snap on hook must be more stiffly designed than the side with engagement hook.
a) Decisive variables,  b) Joining and release angles  .
f Spring travel , l Length,  h Thickness at fixation cross section, F Joining force, Q Excursion force, a1 Joining angle, a2 Release angle.
__ e1  is used . The corresponding stress strain diagrams can be taken for example from the CAMPUS database or obtained from the material manufacturers.
In order to achieve a uniform distribution of strain and optimum material utilization in the bending range of the spring elements, the thickness from the root to the free end should decrease by half. As an alternative, the width to the end of the hook can be reduced to one quarter. Radii at the point of connection of the spring element to the component are recommended in that they help to eliminate concentrations of strain. When joined, the spring element must be fully returned to its initial state in order to prevent creeping under load and thus permanent deformation. Tensile stress in the snap on element as a result of operational forces is permitted.
for different cross sectional shapes can be taken from the relevant technical literature or are provided by special calculation programs.
Included in the calculation of the excursion force Q are the rigidity of the plastic as the secant modulus Es and the geometry as the bending moment/section modulus W.
Values for the section modulus W and the friction coefficient u can also be taken from the technical literature , the thrust capacity of the snap on element limits the strength.
elongation e for snap on connections. .
Calculation programs: Different plastic manufacturers provide easy to use calculation programs as a customer service . Most of the material data for manufacturers' product ranges are integrated into these programs. It is also possible and recommended to check the snap on hook design by means of FEM analysis within the framework of component development.
 DIN 6885 1: Drive type fastenings without taper action; parallel keys, keyways, deep pattern.
 DIN 5464: Straight sided splines Heavy series.
 DIN 254: Geometrical product specifications Series of conical tapers and taper angles; values for setting taper angles and setting heights.
 DIN EN ISO 898 1: Mechanical properties of fasteners made of carbon steel and alloyed steel. Part 1: Bolts, screws and studs with specified property classes Coarse thread and fine pitch thread.
The precise amount of heat required Q is a function of welding current intensity I, resistance R, and welding time t. A good and adequate spot diameter can be achieved by the coordination of weldingcurrent intensity I, electrode force F, and welding time t.
According to the manner in which the current is conducted, a distinction is drawn between bilateral direct resistance spot welding .
The electrode for a specific spot welding operation is selected with reference to shape, outside diameter and point diameter. Since the joining parts should be as free as possible of scaling, oxides, paints, grease, and oils, they receive where necessary appropriate surface pretreatment prior to welding.
of resistance welding process  in acc. with DIN 1910 100 Pressure welding Energy source: electric current Resistance spot welding Seam welding Flash butt welding Butt seam welding Mash resistance welding Resistance welding Resistance projection welding UAM0057 2E
Seam welding Seam welding In this process, roller electrodes replace the spot welding electrodes used in resistance spot welding . Contact between the roller set and the workpiece is limited to an extremely small surface area. The roller electrodes conduct the welding current and apply the electrode force. Their rotation is coordinated with the movement of the part.
Flash butt welding Flash butt welding In flash butt welding, the butt ends of the workpieces are joined under light pressure . The welded joint is then created by upsetting the workpieces with a high compressive force.
a) Bilateral resistance spot welding, b) Unilateral resistance spot welding, c) Resistance projection welding, d) Seam welding, e) Flash butt welding, f) Butt seam welding. 1 Part to be joined, 2 Spot welding electrodes, 3 Welding spot, 4 Transformer,  5 Large surface electrodes, 6 Roller electrodes, 7 Fixed copper jaws,  8 Longitudinally movable copper jaws, 9 Weld joint with seam, 10 Weld joint with bead. a 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 7 2 2 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 6 6 5 7 8 8 9 10 b c d e f 3 3 2 2 UAM0058 3Y
Butt seam welding Butt seam welding This process . The process does not completely displace contamination that may be present at the butt ends. The result is a weld with the characteristic projecting bead.
Fusion welding The term "fusion welding" describes a process employing limited local application of heat to melt and join the parts. No pressure is applied. Shielded .
Gas shielded metal arc welding Gas shielded metal arc welding In gas shielded metal arc welding, an arc is maintained between the melting end of the wire electrode  as protective gas. MIG welding is used with materials which are particularly sensitive to oxidation, e.g., aluminum, magnesium, titanium, and nickel alloys.
Metal active gas . MAG welding is used above all for unalloyed and lowalloy steels. Using inert gases with low active gas admixtures for high alloy, e.g., stainless steels is also referred to as MAG welding.
welding 1 Tungsten electrode,  2 Current contact tube,  3 Inert gas, 4 Inert gas nozzle,  5 Welding filler, 6 Weld seam,  7 Arc, 8 Workpieces, 9 Energy source.
Laser beam welding: Laser beam welding Laser beam welding are used in industrial practice . Newer developments are diode lasers and fiber lasers.
Depending on the wavelength, tube guides with refraction mirrors . To utilize the energy of the laser beam for welding, it is necessary to implement focusing with mirror or lens systems. This allows particularly high energy flux densities to be achieved at the weld, resulting in the deep welding effect, which provides for particularly deep, but at the same time, narrow seams. In the simplest case welding is performed without filler metal. Feeding the workpiece relative to the focusing optics, the optics relative to the workpiece or a combination of the two is used to direct the beam along the seam. Systems with optical fibers are particularly well suited to moving the focusing optics, e. g. during robot controlled welding of three dimensional seam geometries.
In the case of remote welding the beam is directed over the workpiece from a relatively large distance by moving the focusing mirror or the focusing lens inside the focusing optics.
1 Beam generator,  2 Beam direction by refraction mirror,  3 Beam direction by optical fiber,  4 Focusing optics,  5 Focused laser beam,  6 Workpieces with weld seam. a b 1 2 3 4 5 6 6 4 5 7 7 1 UAM0140Y
Soldering: In soldering, a supplementary material  is melted onto two or more parts of similar or varying metallic composition in order to produce a permanent connection between them. Flux or protective gas is also used .
Fluxes are applied to remove oxide layers from the surfaces of the soldering points after cleaning and to prevent new layers from forming: This makes it possible to apply a consistent coat of solder to the joint surfaces. Information on fluxes can be found in DIN EN ISO 9454 1 .
The melting temperature of the solder is below that of the parts being joined. The solder is distributed along the join to produce the connection without the parts themselves being melted.
The strength of a soldered joint can be equal to that of the base material itself. To achieve the required strength, it is  necessary to have narrow soldering gaps in which the adjacent, higher strength base material prevents the solder from deforming.
Information on the temperature range, the heat source and the geometry of the joint shape is used to describe the soldered joints. In terms of the working temperature, a distinction is made between soft soldering and hard soldering. The working temperature is defined as the lowest surface temperature at the connection between the workpieces to be joined at which the solder can be melted and distributed to form a bond. Information on solders can be found in the DlN sheets DIN EN ISO 9453 .
In terms of the joint shapes, a distinction is basically made between close joint soldering .
Distinction by working temperature Soft soldering Soft soldering Soft soldering is employed to form permanent solder joints at melting temperatures below 450 degC . Soft solders which melt at temperatures of 200 degC and below are also known as quick solders.
Manufacturing methods The method used for heating provides yet another criterion for describing soldered joints. The most important types are furnace, induction, open flame, and iron soldering.
Sweating Sweating Heating is performed in through type or vacuum furnaces with defined temperature and time characteristics. Before entering the furnace, the components are secured and the solder is inserted or applied as a paste. Additional fluxes are not required. The furnace atmosphere and the vacuum assume the flux function without leaving residues on the components. Induction soldering Induction soldering Heating is locally limited by inductive means.
Flame soldering: Flame soldering Heating is performed by individual torches or in a gas heated system. Depending on the specific soldering operation, oxyacetylene burners , propane torches or soldering lamps are employed. The solder is usually supplied from the side in the shape of a rod. The flux is applied separately or integrated in the solder.
Close joint soldering and  V joint brazing Furthermore, with regard to the geometry of the solder and the soldering flux, a distinction is made between close joint soldering and V joint brazing.
Close joint soldering Close joint soldering The soldering gap is filled by the capillary effect of the liquid solder. The strength of the soldered joint is determined entirely by the strength of the base materials. Typical manufacturing processes are sweating, flame soldering and induction soldering. V joint brazing V joint brazing The soldering gap is filled by the force of gravity. The strength of the soldered joint is determined above all by the strength of the solder filler. Typical manufacturing processes are arc and laser soldering. Adhesive technologies Adhesives An adhesive is a non metallic material which can join workpieces without the structure of the part to be joined being  significantly altered. An adhesive enables the creation of permanent material joints between homogeneous or heterogeneous material pairings.
Organic and inorganic adhesives as they harden build up firstly adhesion with the material surfaces by way of chemico physical interactions . Depending on their chemistry, these adhesives harden for example at room temperature, at increased temperatures or under UV radiation with different mechanisms.
Hardening .
Two component adhesives Two component adhesives These are adhesives which are made up of two components which must be mixed together to harden. The stoichiometric mixture ratio of the two components must be maintained exactly. Component A contains the basic resin. The second component contains a hardener which initiates the cross linking reaction and links the resin molecules from component A to each other. An accelerator may be added to the hardener. Hardening usually occurs at room tem 
perature, but can by accelerated by the : additional influence of slightly increased temperatures and thus completed more quickly.
Single component adhesives Single component adhesives Single component adhesives contain all the constituents necessary to form a bond in one phase. These systems contain  inhibitors which prevent a premature chemical reaction .
Hardening must, depending on the chemical formulation, be initiated by higher temperatures , ultraviolet radiation or air humidity, and completed. In this process the inhibitors are neutralized and the accelerators also contained in the adhesive are released to speed up the hardening process.
Most single component adhesives must be stored under cooled conditions  until they are ready for use.
Structural designs of adhesive  connections Adhesive connections should be designed so that predominantly shear loads occur. Overlapping joints are particularly suitable. Butt joints subjected to tensile or sliding forces should be avoided.
Combinations of adhesive bonding with other joining methods, e. g. welding, screwing or riveting, can have beneficial effects. The joining spots secure the components during the adhesive hardening time. Stress concentrations for example at the edges of weld spots or at rivet spots can also be minimized. Constructions of this nature provide enhanced structural integrity, rigidity, and damping when subjected to dynamic loads.
Silicone and Silicone and polyurethane adhesives polyurethane adhesives Silicone and polyurethane adhesives are important particularly in bonds with dynamic loads, but also where tightness against liquid media such that only low mechanical stresses can be built up in the bond. Compared with polyurethanes, silicones are also highly suitable for use at high application temperatures up to approximately 220 degC.
Epoxy adhesives Epoxy adhesives Epoxy adhesives, on the other hand, are predominantly very brittle and hard adhesives which can, depending on their formulation, be used up to approximately 200 degC. Compared with flexible adhesives, they are much less susceptible to swelling in liquid media. High strength epoxy resins lack the ability of silicones to compensate by means of deformability , are used specifically for bonds in body manufacturing in order specifically to reduce the  mechanical forces and energies that  occur in a crash situation and to maintain the structural integrity of the passenger cell. Epoxy adhesives facilitate bonds with
very high adhesive strengths .
Acrylate adhesives Acrylate adhesives Acrylates are capable of fast hardening reactions and therefore highly attractive for use in production processes. These adhesives can harden, depending on their chemical architecture, in response to ultraviolet radiation, mixing of components, at increased temperatures or also in response to air humidity  within a few minutes down to a matter of seconds. On the other hand, acrylates do not demonstrate as pronounced thermomechanical performance as silicone and epoxy adhesives above approximately 120 degC or in aggressive media.
ing of housings for sensors, ECUs and video systems; electrically and thermally conductive bonding of electronic component in power modules and electronic circuits.
a) Mushroom head rivet, b) Countersunk head rivet, c) Oval countersunk head rivet, d) Flat round head rivet, e) Hollow rivet, f) Tubular rivet.
rivet .
There are also standardized rivets for specialized applications, e. g. explosive rivets or blind rivets. Blind rivets are hollow and are expanded by a drift or punch. Furthermore, rivets are frequently designed for use as function elements. Examples are rivet nuts and clinch bolts, which serve as bolting points.
The strength properties and the chemical composition of rivet materials are laid down in numerous national and international standards. In the interests of avoiding electrochemical corrosion, it is advisable wherever possible to use materials of the same kind for rivets and component. In mechanical engineering in general and in tank manufacture riveting has largely been displaced by welding.
Punch riveting Process Process The punch riveting technique joins solid materials employing stamping and riveting elements die plate. The riveting die descends and presses the semi hollow rivet through the upper sheet into the lower sheet in a single stamping operation. The rivet deforms and the bottom spreads to form a securing element, usually without fully penetrating the lower sheet.
Penetration clinching processes Processes Penetration clinching .
"Tox clinching" "Tox clinching" Some process variations are still referred to in technical parlance by the original manufacturer's designations, e. g. "Tox clinching" for penetration clinching with a round die without cutting .
Penetration clinching Penetration clinching Penetration clinching .
A Combined indentation and penetration,  B Upsetting and expansion,  C Filling upper contour of mold,  D Filling annular groove,  E Cup extrusion.
 DIN ISO 857 2:2007: Welding and allied processes Vocabulary Part 2: Soldering and brazing processes and related terms .
 DIN EN ISO 9454 1:2016: Soft soldering fluxes; classification and requirements; part 1: classification, labeling and packaging ; German version EN ISO 9454 1:2016.
 DIN EN ISO 12224 1:1998: Solid wire, solid and flux cored Specification and test methods Part 1: Classification and requirements ; German version EN ISO 12224 1:1998.
 DIN 7339:2011: Hollow rivets, one piece, draw from strip.
Coordinate system: Vehicle motion is described by three translational and three rotational degrees of freedom .
Linear motion is caused by motive force, braking force, and frictional force. Lateral motion is a consequence of centrifugal force, crosswind force, and cornering force. Vertical motion is caused by wheel load and forces brought about by road surface irregularities.
UAF0139E Center plane of vehicle Lift z Lateral motion y Linear motion x Yaw Pitch Roll th ps ps S
Because linear velocity during forward driving is by definition positive, the sign preceding the lateral velocity in this case also determines the sign preceding the float angle.
that part which is perpendicular to the trajectory, while the tangential acceleration is that part in the tangential direction of the trajectory.
The signs preceding these rotations correspond to those of a rectangular righthanded system. The counting directions are shown in Figure 1. In many driving maneuvers the body simultaneously moves about more than one axis. Because, when viewed mathematically, the three rotations are not commutative, the following order for the rotations has been defined in DIN ISO 8855: 1. Yaw, 2. Pitch, 3. Roll.
Rotational velocities and accelerations Rotational velocities and accelerations Single time derivation of the rotational motion variables produces the yaw, pitch and roll velocities. Renewed time derivation produces the yaw, pitch and roll accelerations.
Moments Definitions Definitions External forces acting on the vehicle can generate a moment about the center of gravity. This moment is broken down into three components.
In the case of an acceleration the acceleration resistance must additionally be overcome . This resistance is not taken into consideration in the following examination.
The rolling resistance is determined by the coefficient of rolling resistance fR and by the normal force, the force N acting vertically on the road surface .
The deformation work on the tire is created by flexion of the tire. These losses are influenced by the flexing amplitude, which increases with increasing wheel load and decreasing tire inflation pressure, and by the flexing frequency, which increases with the driving speed. The flexing frequency is also higher on tires with a small radius.
N G Gravitational acceleration m/s2 9.81 m/s2 Quantity Unit h Height of projected distance l m l Distance m m Vehicle mass kg N Normal force N PL Aerodynamic drag in kW W PSt Hill climbing power requirement W PW Running resistance power W p Gradient % t Time s u Driving speed m/s u0 Headwind speed m/s a Incline angle, Gradient angle deg r Air density kg/m3
The coefficient of cornering resistance fK is a function of driving speed, curve radius, suspension geometry, tires, tire inflation pressure, and the vehicle's response under lateral acceleration.
a Gradient angle, S Center of gravity, FL Aerodynamic drag, FRo Rolling resistance, FSt Climbing resistance, G Vehicle weight, N Normal force.
The mid size class market segment features the lowest cW values, followed by the luxury class, compact class, sports cars, closed convertibles, station wagons, vans, small cars up to the highest values for open top convertibles and off road vehicles. However, the frontal area of a vehicle also has a significant influence on the power requirement for overcoming the drag. This changes the order with regard to the cW value. Mid size vehicles also  require the lowest power here, followed by the compact class, sports cars and closed top convertibles, which are nearly the same. This is followed by small vehicles and station wagons. Due to the size, luxury vehicles have fallen behind significantly and then open top convertibles due to their  high cW value. Vans and off road vehicles are found at the end. This also shows that the aerodynamic drag at 40 km/h hardly differs between the classes. At 120 km/h, however, there are substantial differences because the power requirement increases with the speed cubed.
ic crag power for different passenger car body configurations at two different driving speeds. On account of the quadratic influence of the airflow velocity on the aerodynamic drag, the aerodynamic drag decisively determines the total running resistance at high speeds.
Refer to Table 6 for the necessary climb : ing power, normalized to 1000 kg vehicle mass, as a function of the speed u and the climbing resistance FSt .
4000 22 33 44 56 67 3500 19 29 39 49 58 3000 17 25 33 42 50 2500 14 21 28 35 42 2000 11 17 22 28 33 1500 8.3 12 17 21 25 1000 5.6 8.3 11 14 17  500 2.3 4.2 5.6 6.9 8.3    0 0 0 0 0 0 45deg 100 6500 6000 5500 5000 4500 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 0 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 0 10 40deg 35deg 30deg 25deg 20deg 15deg 10deg 5deg 0deg 1 in 1 1 in 1.5 1 in 2 1 in 2.5 1 in 3 1 in 4 1 in 5 1 in 10 1 in 20 1 in 50 1 in 100 UAF0007Y
These three subareas can be roughly paraphrased as driving dynamics, agility, and low frequency comfort without acoustics. Above all vehicle handling, which results from operation of the steering wheel, is considered in the dynamics of lateral motion. The dynamics of linear motion focuses on the acceleration behavior of the vehicle, i.e., all those situations in which the driver decelerates or accelerates. The dynamics of vertical motion concerns primarily the interaction with uneven roads and the effect of imbalance with rotating components, such as the wheel/tire system for example .
These three subareas should not be sharply distinguished from each other. There is for example the "Braking in a turn/curve" maneuver . This maneuver combines the dynamics of lateral motion with the dynamics of linear motion. Because this maneuver involves primarily the stability of the vehicle in the lateral direction and not deceleration values, it is assigned to the dynamics of lateral motion subarea. Another example the "tramp of a vehicle". This vehicle behavior combines the dynamics of lateral motion with the dynamics of vertical motion. Here an unwanted jerking motion is caused in the lateral direction which can arise when a wheel runs in a turn/curve over an uneven area and at the same time the damping is insufficient to maintain contact between tire and road.
Dynamics of linear motion: Features The dynamics of linear motion .
The change in a vehicle's motion caused by steering, acceleration and braking is brought about by forces which are transmitted to the road on account of friction between tire and road surface. The extent of the maximum transmissible force depends among other things on the force at the wheels acting on the road, the wheel load. The forces acting on the road are also influenced by speed dependent aerodynamic lifting forces and downforces.
The overall transmission ratio i for today's passenger cars is in the range of 1.5 to 20 and for off road vehicles with additional reduction gears also much higher than this.
The motive force F is partially consumed in overcoming the running resistance FW. Numerically higher transmission ratios are applied to deal with the substantially increased running resistance encountered on gradients .
for a car with automatic transmissions and hydrodynamic torque converter at full load 1 Motive force lines .
UAF0010 3E kN 14 12 1st gear 2nd gear 3rd gear 4th gear additional gears 10 8 6 4 2 1 2 0 0 50 100 150 200 Driving speed Motive force Running resistance 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% Pitch km/h
Tractive force running diagram The tractive force . To the left of the point of intersection the motive force is greater than the running resistance and the vehicle is consequently accelerated. At the point of intersection the motive force is utilized entirely to overcome the running resistance and the vehicle speed thus remains constant.
During a translational acceleration of the vehicle the rotating parts of the drivetrain .
2 mm Iced  .
Aquaplaning Aquaplaning Aquaplaning has a particularly dramatic influence on the contact between tire and road surface. It describes the state in which a layer of water separates the tire and the . The phenomenon occurs when a wedge of water forces its way underneath the tire's contact patch and lifts it from the road. The tendency to aquaplane is dependent upon such factors as the depth of the water on the road surface, the vehicle's speed, the tread pattern, the tread wear, and the load pressing the tire against the road surface. Wide tires are particularly susceptible to aquaplaning. An aquaplaning vehicle cannot transmit control and braking forces to the road surface, and may as result go into a skid.
that can be achieved are always somewhat lower, as all the vehicle's tires do not simultaneously exploit their maximum possible adhesion during each acceleration or deceleration. Electronic traction control and braking systems maintain the traction level in the vicinity of the greatest possible coefficient of static friction ur.
coefficient km VH Engine displacement in liters, m Vehicle mass, i  Overall ratio between engine and drive wheels, r Wheel radius.
sary for the driver to turn his eyes towards the hazardous situation, the hazard recognition and danger reaction time will extend by roughly 0.4 s. It is further increased by poor concentration or tiredness.
The reaction time is the period of time the driver requires to transfer the foot from the accelerator pedal to the brake pedal. The transfer time is in the range of about 0.2 s.
UAF0076E Deceleration System See Recognize See Recognize Time Full braking time tV Braking time tB Braking distance Perception Hazard recognition Start of braking Vehicle stationary Stopping distance Pre braking time tVZ Hazard recognition time Stopping time tAH tR tU tA tS/2tS/2
The pressure build up time may be assumed as the start of braking, determined by way of calculation. In accordance with the EU Council of Ministers Directive EEC 71/320 Addendum 3/2.4 , the sum of the response time and pressure build up time may not exceed 0.6 s. A poorly maintained braking system will lengthen the response and pressure build up time.
Braking time Braking time The braking time , during which maximum braking deceleration is actually effective.
examination of two extreme conditions: : passing at a constant velocity and passing at a constant rate of acceleration. We can simplify graphic representation by treating the passing distance su as the sum of two  components, while disregarding the extra travel involved by pulling out of the lane and back in again.
The distance sH which the more rapid vehicle must cover compared to the slower vehicle  is the sum of the vehicle lengths l1 and l2 and the safety margins s1 and s2.
First, determine the distance sH to be traveled by the passing vehicle. Enter this distance on the left side of the graph between the Y axis and the applicable  line or acceleration line. Then extrapolate the line to the right, over to the speed line uL.
Visual range Visual range For safe passing on narrow roads, the visibility must be at least the sum of the passing distance plus the distance which would be traveled by an oncoming vehicle while the passing maneuver is in progress. This distance is approximately 400 m if the vehicles approaching each other are traveling at speeds of 90 km/h, and the vehicle being overtaken at 60 km/h.
80 12.5 20 31.5 50 80 125 200 315 100 63 40 25 16 10 10 80 63 50 40 40 50 63 80 100 s 20 16 12.5 10 8 6.3 5 4 3.15 2.5 2 1.6 1.25 1 10 16 16 25 40 63 100 160 250 400 m 50 31.5 20 12.5 0.4 0.63 1 1.6 m/s2 12.5 20 25 31.5 km/h km/h y L Speed Acceleration a Passing time tu Rel. distance sH traveled by passing vehicle Distance sL traveled by vehicle being passed H  L y y UAF0015 1E
Dynamics of lateral motion: Features The dynamics of lateral motion deal with all the vehicle states in which a dynamic response occurs in the transverse direction to the vehicle longitudinal axis. These maneuvers are caused above all by the steering of the vehicle, but also by external influences such as crosswind.
Ranges of lateral acceleration Passenger cars can reach lateral accelerations of up to 10 m/s2. This range is below sports racing cars, which can reach up to 40 to 50 m/s2, but significantly above commercial vehicles, which depending on size and load can only achieve 4 to 5 m/ s2. Lateral acceleration is subdivided into the following ranges : Small signal range Small signal range The range from 0 to 0.5 m/s2 is known as the small signal range. The phenomenon to be considered in this range is the straight running behavior, caused by crosswind and irregularities in the road, such as ruts. Crosswind excitation is induced by blustery, gusty wind and by driving into and out of wind shadow areas.
A Small signal range, B Linear range .
8 6 4 2 0 0 100 150 50 200 km/h Speed u m/s2 B A C D Probability of occurrence 0.01% Parameter: radius of bend City 1,000 m 500 m 100 m 10 m Expressway/ interstate Highway 2,000 m Lateral acceleration ay UAF0077 2E
Linear range: Linear range The range from 0.5 to 4 m/s2 is known as the linear range, as the vehicle behavior that occurs in this range can be described with the aid of the linear single track model. Typical maneuvers involving dynamics of lateral motion include sudden steering input, changing driving lanes as well as combinations of maneuvers involving dynamics of both lateral and longitudinal motion, such as load change reactions when cornering. Transition range.
In the lateral acceleration range from 4 to 6 m/s2, depending on their design features, passenger vehicles are categorized as either still linear or already nonlinear. This range is therefore considered to be a transition range. In this range, vehicles with maximum lateral acceleration of 6 to 7 m/s2 still behave in line with linear characteristics. Limit range Limit range The lateral acceleration range above 6 m/s2 is reached only in extreme situations and is therefore referred to as the limit range. In this range, the vehicle characteristics are predominantly nonlinear, with the main emphasis shifted to vehicle stability. This range is reached on racing circuits or in situations leading up to accidents in normal road traffic.
The average driver generally drives in the range up to 4 m/s2. This means both the small signal range as well as the linear range are relevant to the car driver when subjectively assessing the situation . For the average car driver, the probability of lateral acceleration occurring decreases exponentially with lateral acceleration.
b Float angle, ps Yaw rate, b0 Float angle with wheel rolling free of slip, dA Ackermann angle, d  Steering angle, av Slip angle, front wheel, ah Slip angle, rear wheel, uv Tire velocity at front axle, uh Tire velocity at rear axle, l Wheelbase, FFl Centrifugal force, FSV Lateral force on front axle, FSH Lateral force on rear axle, MP Instantaneous center, S Center of gravity, R Distance between center of gravity of instantaneous center, Rv Distance between front axle and instantaneous center, Rh Distance between rear axle and instantaneous center, lv Distance between center of gravity and front axle, lh Distance between center of gravity and rear axle. Slow skidpad: The wheels roll without lateral slip no slip angles and therefore also no lateral forces. Fast skidpad:  The wheels rolls with lateral slip this results in slip angles and therefore also in lateral forces.
__ l   .
All passenger vehicles are designed so that they understeer in the linear lateral acceleration range. The EG value for passenger vehicles is in the range of about 0.25 degrees * s2/m.
In terms of the dynamics of lateral motion, the self steering gradient characterizes the stability and damping of the vehicle. In addition, the significance of the self steering gradient for the average car driver becomes apparent in that the steering angle requirement increases the faster the cornering speed. This draws the driver's attention to the increasing lateral acceleration.
The float angle gradient can be calculated from Figure 9. The float angle gradient should be as low as possible in order to increase the stability of the vehicle .
The SG value range for passenger cars is below 0.35 degrees * s2/m. Greater floatangle gradients are perfectly manageable for experts, but already for stationary maneuvers give rise to a bad safety feeling for regular drivers and are therefore avoided.
Yaw gain The yaw gain defines the degree of yaw response that a vehicle executes in response to a steering angle in the quasi steadystate range. The yaw gain factor can be determined by conducting the follow test procedure: When driving at a constant speed, the steering wheel is turned with sinusoidal motion at a frequency of less than 0.2 Hz. The steering angle amplitude is selected in order to achieve a maximum lateral acceleration of about 3 m/s2.
The damping factor of a vehicle can be identified, for example, from the yaw response of sudden steering or step input. The vehicle is designed to ensure that damping is as high as possible.
This maximum is plotted in the lateralagility diagram as a function of the steering ratio. The diagram additionally shows the EG isolines. The selfsteering gradient is constant along these curves. The desired target ranges for the yaw gain and steering ratio can be plotted in this diagram for the purpose of defining the necessary self steering gradients. If only the steering ratio is changed in a vehicle, the maximum yaw gain can be determined in the lateral agility diagram by shifting the baseline along the EG isolines. The shift will be along the vertical axis if the axis characteristics are varied. General single track and two track model The linear single track model can be used to specify analytically the self steering gradient, the float angle gradient, and the yaw gain with associated damping factor; this makes the relationships clear. If the desire is to describe real vehicle behavior more accurately, more and more nonlinearities must be taken into account. This can be realized for example by taking into account the nonlinear behavior of the lateral force from the slip angle. With such nonlinearities it is possible to develop single track models which also describe the roll of the vehicles and the handling up to a steering frequency of 3 Hz and are also valid in the driving dynamic limit range . Almost exclusively so called two track models are used in the automotive industry to predict the dynamics of lateral motion. The big advantage of these two track models lies in the component oriented modeling of the complete vehicle and thus better integration in the development sequence.
The use of two track models is also sensible for the following aspects "Dynamics of lateral motion caused by crosswind" and "Roll behavior when cornering". Dynamics of lateral motion caused  by crosswind Wind can induce lateral dynamics in motor vehicles. The vehicle responds to this external influence by drifting off course, lateral acceleration, and a change in yaw angle and roll angle. The driver then attempts to take corrective action to counteract this discrepancy. Consequently, the response capabilities of the driver as well as the correctability of the vehicle are taken into consideration in a second stage. According to current findings, the direct response of the vehicle to crosswind is the principal variable for subjectively assessing overall vehicle stability in crosswinds. This offers the advantage that the interaction between crosswind and vehicle response can be effectively observed by analysis.
Aerodynamic forces and moments When a vehicle moves at velocity u in a wind at a speed uw, the vehicle will be subject to wind impact applied at the resulting velocity ur. In connection with natural crosswind, the angle of impact t generally differs from 0 degrees and therefore generates a lateral force FS and a yawing moment MZ that acts on the vehicle.
To keep aerodynamic influences as low as possible, appropriate steps should be taken to ensure that the center of the pressure point D is as close to the vehicle's center of gravity S as possible. This consequently reduces the effective impact of the moment.
u Driving speed, uw Wind velocity, ur Resulting velocity, t Angle of impact, FS Crosswind force, l Wheelbase, d Distance between B and D, Mz Yawing moment.
d Distance between aerodynamic reference point B and center of pressure point D. Fs l d B Mz S D r w t u u u 0.4 0.8 1.2 1 2 2 1 2 1 0 0.1 0.2 0 Lateral force coefficient cS Yaw moment coefficient cM 0.8 0.4 0 0deg 10deg 20deg 30deg Distance d Angle of impact t m UAF0016 2E UAF0082 3E
with the center of gravity located at the : mid point of the wheelbase, the station wagon structure is therefore less sensitive to crosswind than the sedan structure. Roll behavior when cornering When corning the vehicle body rolls about its roll axis. This rolling motion is caused by the centrifugal force FFL . Like all rigid bodies, the vehicle body consistently executes a screwing or rotating motion; this motion is supplemented by a lateral displacement along the instantaneous axis.
The higher the roll axis, i.e., the closer it is to a parallel axis through the center of gravity, the lower the vehicle inclination due to cornering with an alternating and parallel spring rate. But because the roll centers of the axes must stray upwards for this purpose, the track change increases. Excessive track changes may give rise to disrupted directional stability when driving on an uneven road and hence poor handling that compromises the feeling of safety. There is also the risk of the body lifting at higher lateral accelerations if the roll centers are too high. Therefore the roll centers are typically under 120 mm.
A frequently applied means for finding the approximate roll axis is based on determining the centers of rotation of an equivalent body motion. This body motion takes place in those two planes through the front and rear axles which are vertical relative to the road. The centers of rotation are those .
The complexity of the operations required for a more precise definition of the spatial relationships involved in wheel motion make it advisable to employ general, three dimensional simulation models .
b Track width, hS Height of center of gravity, R Curve radius, e Curve banking, G Vehicle weight, FFL Centrifugal force. S Center of gravity, W Roll center.
Dynamics of vertical motion: Features The dynamics of vertical motion of a vehicle are determined primarily by its behavior in the vertical direction when driving over road excitations. There are also excitations in the transverse and longitudinal directions and excitations of rotating bodies with imbalance, for example generated by imbalance in the wheel/tire combination, but the vertical excitations of the road are the primary concern here. The frequency range under consideration extends up to approximately 30 Hz. The purpose of the vehicle is to transfer the excitations of the road with the lowest possible accelerations to the vehicle occupants.
The dynamics of vertical motion of a vehicle are also referred to as ride comfort; this relates to the haptically perceptible comfort, but not the acoustics.
Road excitation Before a simplified model of the transfer behavior of a vehicle is presented, the issue of quantifying road excitation will be addressed.
Height of irregularity h c b a h T, L T, L Time t Distance x Time t Distance x Time t Distance x ^ Height of irregularity h Height of irregularity h UFF0216 1E
 or the "power output in the natural frequency band" is sufficient.
If the degree of irregularity and the surface undulation of a road surface are known, all the parameters are set in the above linear equation and it can then be used to characterize different types of road surface. The degree of irregularity is defined as the power spectral density at a reference angular frequency, i.e., Phh.
1,000 cm3 10 100 1 1 3 2 4 0.01 0.1 0.001 0.0001 0.0001 0.001 0.1 cm 0.001 0.01 0.1 cm 1 Wavelength of irregularity L Path angular frequency ohm Spectrum of irregularity Phh UFF0217 1E
The biggest advantage of power spec : tral density is that with the ISO standard ISO 8608:2016 11 it sets out a standard so that all stochastic courses of irregularity can be classified from "very good" to "very bad".
The disadvantage of power spectral density is that individual obstacles, such as for example drain covers, expansion joints on bridges, and so called sleeping policemen, cannot be correctly resolved even though these are clearly discerned by the driver when driven over in the vehicle. These individual obstacles are therefore considered separately.
 The division of Equation 11a and Equation 11b by the mass in each case leads to the normal form of a differential equation of the 2nd order and delivers the damped natural frequency og and the undamped natural angular frequency ou as well as the damping factors for the wheel DR and the body DA.
______ mR       ___ cR ___ mR   .
as quarter vehicle model mR Wheel mass, including components that also vibrate , kA,R Wheel related dampening rate of the body damper, h Vertical excitation, zA Body coordinates in vertical direction, zR Wheel coordinates in vertical direction. kA,R cA,R mA kR h cR mR zR zA UFF0218 1E
 FF Actual spring force, FR Wheel force, zR Spring compression, d2 Distance from wheel center plane to the pivot, d2 d1 Spring force lever arm.
These transfer functions are now linked to the road irregularities. The results are the power spectral densities for the body acceleration .
spectral density for body acceleration and wheel load fluctuations  Amount of transfer function, wheel load fluctuation.
load fluctuations and body acceleration fluctuations as a function of body stiffness and body damping UAE1400 1E 0.23 0.25 0.21 0.19 0.17 0.15 0.13 0.11 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 95 90 Wheel load fluctuations Acceleration fluctuations sF sa Dam ping gr eater St iff ne ss gr ea ter z z
Realistic vehicle models for the : dynamics of vertical motion Complete vehicle models based on general multiple body simulation programs are used to predict the dynamics of vertical motion. In this way, the component properties are directly parameterized and do not have to be converted. In addition, all the degrees of freedom of the body are then naturally excited, i.e., aside from the vertical direction, as in the quarter vehicle model, lateral and longitudinal motion. The torsion bars on the front and rear axles can also be evaluated with a complete vehicle model. In this way, the vibrational behavior of the wheel and the engine/transmission combination can also be analyzed in order to come up with a favorable design of the engine and transmission mounts with the body damping and body stiffness.
For further refine the dynamics of vertical motion the body damping and body stiffness not only are defined by constant values as in the quarter vehicle but have nonlinear identifiers.
In the case of real vehicle axles the socalled secondary spring rate must be taken into account as well as the friction. The secondary spring rate can, depending on the axle type, be up to 20 % of the spring rate of the body spring. The reason for this is that the rubber mounts installed in the axle also possess a stiffness which becomes noticeable when the axle is deflected. Thus, the expressions found for the stiffness of the body spring and damping of the body damper are initial guide values.
Objectification of subjective perception Only a short time after the introduction of the automobile, the first approaches to objectifying ride comfort were developed at the start of the 20th century. The influence of comfort particularly in the case of professional drivers on fitness is taken into account with the help of the corresponding frequency weighting filters.
 __________  1 __ T  0 T aw 2
4  __________  1 __ T  0 T aw 4 are taken into account equally in the calculation of the factor. However, no uniform specifications for weighting individual initiation positions have yet been developed.
Evaluation methods which take the Weber Fechner law into account are much more accurate than simple absolute evaluations . Nevertheless, these evaluation methods must be supported by a real road test or by trials with test subjects on suitable simulators.
more than two axles so as to be able to achieve greater vehicle weights. The difference between the vehicle weight in the laden and unladen states is much greater in trucks and light utility vans than in passenger cars.
Dynamics of linear motion  of commercial vehicles As in passenger cars the rolling resistance of a commercial vehicle comprises rolling resistance, aerodynamic drag, and if necessary climbing resistance. Because of the high weight, for heavy trucks on gradients greater than approx. 1 % climbing resistance is the dominant contributor to rolling resistance .
80 km/h or 90 km/h for heavy commercial vehicles in the majority of European countries means that aerodynamic drag unlike for passenger cars never becomes the dominant factor.
Because commercial vehicles are limited in length in the EU .
The self steering effect of leaf spring axles is essentially determined by the inclination of the leaf springs in the longitudinal direction of the vehicle. Because the inclination of the leaf spring branches changes with the load, the self steering effect of leaf spring axles is dependent on the vehicle load. This effect is referred to as "roll steer" of the axle in that it depends on the roll angle of the vehicle when cornering as well as on the compression/jounce.
Steering movements that result from the elasticity of axle bearings are a further component of self steering. These are dependent on the cornering force on the wheel and are therefore referred to as "lateral force steer".
Heavy duty trucks with air suspension are normally equipped with solid or rigid axles controlled with suspension arms and links. Self steering can be influenced by a specific design of the flexibility of the link bearings. Because these axles are normally also fitted with ride height control, the kinematic position of the links
External interference factors such as road surface irregularities or crosswind, for example, must not give rise to any great disruptions of vehicle motion. The elastokinematic design of the chassis serves to minimize these interference factors. On the front axles the aim is to minimize steering movements as a result of parallel and alternating compression and rebound and as a result of braking. The kinematic points of the steering, for example, act as the setting levers in the configuration of the elastokinematics. In the case of leaf spring axles the connecting points of the leaf springs and the leaf thickness progressions are important setting levers.
Geometrically nonlinear finite element programs are used in the calculation to configure the elastokinematics. The configuration is monitored on elastokinematic test benches and in the complete vehicle road test.
tion threshold of these systems can be : adapted within limits to the load and load distribution of the vehicle whereby these variables are estimated by an algorithm from the vehicle's instantaneous handling. Width requirement The width requirement of motor vehicles and truck trailer combinations is greater during cornering than when the vehicle moves in a straight line. With respect to selected driving maneuvers, it is necessary to determine the radius described by the vehicle's outer extremities during cornering, both in order to ascertain its suitability for certain applications . This is determined using multibody system simulations or by means of real tests.
Dynamic handling can be evaluated for example with the "sinusoidal steering input" maneuver. Test procedures are additional used to evaluate driving stability in braking operations .
The dynamic lateral response of trucktrailer combinations generally differs from that of rigid vehicles. Particularly significant are the distribution of loads between truck and trailer or semitrailer, and the design and geometry of the mechanical coupling device within a given combination.
responses 1 Semitrailer unit . UFA0040 3E 0.14 0.15 0.13 0.12 0.11 0 Hz Frequency Yaw velocity/steering wheel angle 1/s 1 2 3 4 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.8 0.6
________________________________: References References H. P. Willumeit: Modelle und Modellierungsverfahren in der Fahrzeugdynamik, Teubner Verlag, 1998.
 71/320/EEC: Council Directive of 26 July 1971 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the braking devices of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers.
 B. Jorissen: Objektivierung der menschlichen Schwingungswahrnehmung unter Einfluss realer Fahrbahnanregungen, Dissertation, University of DuisburgEssen, 2011.
 ISO 14792 : Road vehicles Heavy commercial vehicles and buses Steady state circular tests.
 Commission Directive 2003/19/EC of 21 March 2003 for changing the Guideline 97/27/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council about the weights and dimensions of certain classes of motor vehicles and motor vehicle trailers regarding the adaptation to the technical progress.
driver assesses the vehicle's handling qualities based on the sum total of his/her subjective impressions. Internationally standardized test procedures have been developed since the end of the 1970s. On the one hand, these test procedures are intended to describe vehicle handling as objectively and consistently as possible. On the other hand, they serve to determine characteristic variables which correlate well with the subjective driving impressions.
SAF0028 3E Yaw velocity Yaw angle Direction Driving speed Pitch angle Roll angle Lateral velocity, lateral acceleration Linear velocity, longitudinal acceleration Float angle z C x y Steering wheel angle, steering wheel torque
General boundary conditions which must be equally observed for all driving dynamics test procedures, for example, the condition of the road surface, environmental conditions and tires, are defined in a separate ISO standard , which additionally defines what is required of the measuring techniques for driving dynamics measurements.
Depending on the test procedure defined, characteristic values are determined from these and other quantities for the purpose of describing and assessing vehicle handling. These measured values and characteristic quantities are defined in a separate ISO standard starting from a very slow starting speed up to the maximum attainable vehicle lateral acceleration. The longitudinal acceleration here should be significantly below 1 m/s2 so that the driving state can be viewed as sufficiently steady state. When semitrailer truck or truck trailer combinations are measured, the measurement is conducted at a number of constant driving speeds on a specified circular course radius.
From the curve of steering wheel angle against lateral acceleration it is possible to determine the vehicle's self steering effect using a single lane model . Today's vehicles, both passenger cars and heavy duty commercial vehicles, are basically designed as understeering. In other words, as their speed increases on a constant circular course radius, they require a significant increase in steering angle. The limit range of an understeering vehicle is determined by the maximum transferable cornering force of the front wheels, which is recognizable from the sharply progressively rising steering wheel angle with high lateral acceleration. It is clear from the representation that as a rule higher lateral accelerations are possible for automobiles than for trucks.
"Driver Vehicle Environment"  as closed loop UAF0027 4E External disturbance values Drive Brakes Steering Projected course Road factors Vehicle Driver Actual course: resulting handling and braking response
of commercial vehicles. In the case of : commercial vehicles with a high loading center of gravity, the maximum achievable lateral acceleration is for the most part determined not by the cornering force of the tires, but by the tipping limit of the vehicle. In the case of trucks, the roll angle is additionally determined not only at the center of vehicle gravity, but also, due to the torsionally weak frame and the separate driver's cab mounting, at several fixed measuring points.
Transient response The test procedures for transient response serve to determine the vehicle response to rapid, dynamic steering stimulations, e.g.,during rapid evasion maneuvers. Procedures frequently used in tests and simulation are "Step input" and "Sinusoidal steering input and frequency response".
Assessment The time delay and the overswing values with which the quantities of yaw velocity, lateral acceleration, roll angle, and float angle respond to the steering wheel angle input are determined during this maneuver . The vehicle should, on the one hand, not respond too sluggishly to the steering movement and, on the other hand, not respond with excessive overswing to the steering input. Figure 4 shows that a truck reacts much more sluggishly than a passenger car.
Sinusoidal steering input and frequency Sinusoidal steering input and frequency response response Performance The "Sinusoidal steering input and frequency response" test procedure involves the vehicle being excited at a constant driving speed for example 80 km/h with a sinusoidal steering wheel angle signal whose amplitude is kept constant and whose frequency is increased starting at slow steering movements of 0.2 Hz to fast steering movements up to 2.0 Hz. This makes it possible to assess the dynamic vehicle handling in the entire steering frequency range to be excited by the driver.
The steering amplitude is kept constant during the test and is as a rule selected in such a way that the vehicle remains in the linear driving range, i.e., in the case of passenger cars in such a way that a lateral acceleration of max. 4 m/s2 is obtained at the slowest steering frequency. In the case of heavy commercial vehicles, lower maximum lateral accelerations are selected for the most part.
 dH Steering wheel angle, ps. Yaw velocity, phs Phase angle,  d Amplitude of steering angle input.
the yaw velocity. The position of the natural : frequencies, the banking that occurs and the phase angles can be used as an assessment criterion for vehicle agility and stability in the case of dynamic steering excitations. Heavy banking in the curve of the yaw velocity amplitude would for example indicate "nervous" vehicle handling at a specific steering frequency. Large phase angles and a sharply falling amplitude curve indicates on the other hand a very sluggish response by the vehicle in the case of fast steering movements.
As well as the vehicle parameters which influence the stationary handling, the damping properties and the moments of inertia of the vehicle as well as the dynamic properties of tires, steering system and wheel suspension are crucial to vehicle handling in the case of dynamic driving maneuvers.
Weave test and transition test The "Weave test" and "Transition test" assessment procedures to a circular course with a low lateral acceleration of 1 to 2 m/s2. In practice this corresponds to the operation of turning at low speed into a curve on a secondary road. Assessment Above all, the time characteristics of the quantities of yaw velocity and steering wheel torque are assessed. Among others, the time after which the vehicle responds with a quantity of yaw velocity that can be perceived by the driver to the steering excitation is a suitable assessment quantity.
Weave test Weave test Performance In the weave test the vehicle is excited at a constant driving speed , i.e., the vehicle is constantly in the linear driving range.
Assessment To assess the vehicle handling and steering behavior, the curves for the quantities of steering wheel torque, yaw velocity, lateral acceleration, and float angle as a function of the input steering wheel angle are used. The non linearities in the steering system, tires and wheel suspension give rise to hysteresis loops, like the hysteresis loop of steering wheel torque vs. steering wheel angle shown by way of example in Figure 6. The ranges of the hystereses and the rise gradients of the curves are suitable assessment criteria. For example, the steering behavior of a vehicle which demonstrates on overlapping hysteresis loop, like vehicle B in Figure 6, is perceived by the driver to be "indifferent about the center position" and "poor in straight running stability".
0 1 1 2 3 4 5 30 20 10 0 Steering wheel angle Steering wheel torque 10 20 30 2 3 4 Nm Vehicle A Vehicle B UAF0098 1E
Braking in a turn/curve: Performance Performance The "Braking in a turn/curve" test procedure , the vehicle is braked with a constant steering wheel angle and a defined deceleration, set by the brake pedal travel required for this purpose. Several tests are carried out in which the brake pedal setting and thus the braking deceleration are varied from light braking through to full braking.
yaw velocity, lateral acceleration and float angle of a 7.5 ton truck during a braking operation with a deceleration of 3 m/s2. Once the braking has started , a clear banking of the driving dynamics quantities can be made out. It shows that the vehicle turns in to the inside of the curve during the braking operation.
The extent of the banking of the driving dynamics quantities, which are usually plotted against the varied longitudinal deceleration, are used as an assessment criterion for vehicle stability .
As well as the vehicle parameters which influence vehicle handling in the driving maneuvers described up to now, the braking force distribution between front and rear axles and the design of the brake control systems ABS and driving dynamics control have a significant influence on vehicle handling during this maneuver. It is therefore used among other things to tune the brake system and brake control systems.
Closing curve The "Closing Curve" test procedure  was developed against the backdrop of the change to the ECE regulation ECE R13, which requires that as of 2014 virtually all heavy commercial vehicles be duly equipped with ESC systems.
Assessment Assessment The test procedure is carried out at different speeds and center of gravity heights, in each case with ESC activated and deactivated. The lift of the inner cornering wheels is used to assess whether the maneuver is classed as "passed". Figure 8b shows, as a function of center of gravity height and driving speed, the areas in which the maneuver has passed. The enhanced safety provided by ESC becomes visible.
, ,      , /s 0 2 4 6 8 10 UAF0034 3E
 ISO 13674: Road vehicles Test method for the quantification of on centre handling Part 1: Weave test .
 ISO 11012 : Heavy commercial vehicles and buses Open loop test methods for the quantification of on centre handling Weave test and transition test.
 ISO 14794 : Heavy commercial vehicles and buses Braking in a turn Open loop test methods.
 ISO 15037: Road vehicles Vehicle dynamics test methods Part 1: General conditions for passenger cars .
UAF0121 1E 0 m 50 50 100 50 50 0 m 40 30 50 Driving speed Center of gravity height 60 70 km/h A B 1.7 1.6 1.4 a b
a Acceleration reserve, vehicle A b Acceleration reserve, vehicle B c Running resistance, vehicle A d Running resistance, vehicle B Full load curve Driving speed in km/h Vehicle B Vehicle A 100 120 11% consumption advantage Vehicle B 102% 105% 110% 115% 175% 125% 140% 100% optimal consumption 506 Vehicle physics Vehicles which draw the energy for propulsion from fossil fuels and consequently emit CO2 while driving are subject to limits on these emissions. CO2 emissions are proportional to fuel consumption. This also applies to mildand full hybrid vehicles which can run their internal combustion engines at more fuel efficient operating points and thus exhibit lower fuel consumption. The batteries of externally rechargeable hybrid vehicles can be charged from the power socket of the mains supply network or from a charging post; this supplied electrical energy stored in the traction battery must therefore be taken into account in the energy demand. Electric vehicles ultimately draw all the energy required for drive purposes from the mains supply network and thus do not emit any CO2 locally.
Fuel consumption of internalcombustion engines Specific fuel consumption The most common way of presenting engine fuel consumption maps is the "graph diagram", in which the effective mean pressure pme and, as family parameters, lines of constant specific consumption . This makes it possible to compare the efficiency of engines of different sizes and types.
Another way of presentation is, as a family parameter, the fuel throughput or mass flow .
__________________________________________________________ u dt Distance Energy demand for drives 507 Entered in both presentations as additional information are the full load torque curve as the upper limiting line, the idle and breakaway speeds as limiting speeds, and often also lines of constant power P .
External running resistances External running resistances The external running resistances determine a vehicle's minimum energy demand in a specified driving profile. They can be reduced by measures such as reduced vehicle mass, lower tire rolling resistance, and improved aerodynamics. On an average production vehicle without regenerative braking, 10 % reductions in mass, drag and rolling resistance result in fuel consumption reductions of roughly 6 %, 3 %, and 2 %, respectively.
The formula in Figure 2 distinguishes between acceleration resistance and braking resistance. This illustrates clearly that consumption per unit of distance increases above all when the brakes are subsequently applied and not the overrun fuel cutoff of the engine or even a hybrid system is used to recover some of the brake energy.
g Gravitational acceleration m/s2 t Time s u Driving speed m/s A Acceleration m/s2 Br Braking resistance N eU Transmission efficiency  of the drivetrain r Density of the air kg/m3 a Gradient angle deg
sum total of the internal and external run : ning resistances are shown by curves c and d, where vehicle A shows significantly lower resistances than vehicle B.
As well as the transmission losses in the drivetrain, the overall ratio also affects fuel consumption. This is calculated from the product of the transmission and differential ratios. The choice of overall ratio results in different operating points in the engine fuel consumption map for a specific driving speed. A "longer" ratio, i.e., a smaller overall ratio, will generally move the operating points to map areas corresponding to lower fuel consumption. At the same time, it must be noted that the accelerating performance is reduced and the NVH behavior worsens . The CO2 content of the exhaust gas is proportional to the fuel consumption.
.
Vehicle masses are simulated on the test bench as an alternative by test masses. In today's certification cycles the test mass is, depending on the country and the curb weight of the vehicle, graded in increments of 55 to 120 kg. When the vehicle mass is allocated to the corresponding the ready for operation weight of the vehicle plus 100 kg as substitute for a driver and luggage is applied. The difference in consumption in the jump to an adjacent inertia weight class is depending on the vehicle between 0.15 and 0.25 l/100 km. In the WLTC the actual vehicle mass is applied as the test mass.
Units of fuel consumption Standard fuel consumption is given in different units, depending on the country and the test cycle. In Europe, the figure is given in g CO2/km or l/100 km, in the USA in mpg , and in Japan in km/l.
The fixed value of 235.21 used for conversion is obtained from the conversion of gallons to liters and the conversion of miles to kilometers.
Time: WLTP CD1 WLTP CD2 WLTP CD3 WLTP CS km/h % State of charge SoC Speed Charge Depleting Test CD Electric range Charge Sustaining Test CS UAF0134 1E Energy demand for drives 509 Fuel consumption of hybrid vehicles Particularities of fuel consumption  of autarkic hybrids In the dynamometer testing of autarkic hybrids the battery current is determined as well as the CO2 value and it is ensured in all the country specific legislation that the battery state of charge is the same before and after the test. The permitted tolerance and possible corrections differ between Europe, USA, and Japan.
Particularities of fuel consumption  of externally rechargeable hybrids Externally rechargeable hybrids . Wall charging stations enable the battery to be charged at high power levels and thus reduce the charging time.
The utility factor as a function of the electric range. It can be determined from field data in accordance with SAE standard J2841 
Figure 5: Relative range change as : a function of temperature referred to  the NEDC certification range 1 Constant 50 km/h, 2 Constant 100 km/h, 3 Constant 150 km/h, 4 Constant 200 km/h, 5 WLTC, 6 Long distance, 7 NYCC .
of the electric range in the WLTC EU .
range in the WLTC of 50 km the utility factor in China is 72 %, i.e., for sustaining consumption of 6 l/100 km the certification consumption would be 1.7 l/100 km. The fuel consumption of a plug in hybrid on the road can deviate markedly from the certification values since the share of electric driving depends, as well as on the driving style, very much on the customer's electric charging behavior. The charging behavior is decisively influenced by the existing charging infrastructure and the operating convenience.
Range and consumption  of electric vehicles Electric range The official data for the standard range are determined on the basis of dynamometer tests on test benches in which statutory test cycles are repeatedly run. For example, for an electric range of 200 km the NEDC cycle must be run approximately 19 times. As in the dynamometer tests conducted on conventional vehicles and hybrids, secondary loads and air conditioning influences are not taken into account here either. The latter play a large role in electric vehicles with regard to the attainable range because all the energy for heating and cooling is drawn from the battery and thus is no longer available for propulsion. Figure 5 shows the air conditioning influence for heating, cooling or dehumidifying , represented by different cycles, referred to the attainable range.
Figure 6: Electrical power socket con : sumption as a function of charging power and charging procedure Relative power socket consumption is referred to the consumption at 1.4 kW charging power. 0 8 4 12 100 kW 95 90 85 80 100 AC charging Mode 2 Mode 3 DC charging % Charging power Relative power socket consumption < < Energy demand for drives 511 The higher the energy demand from the driving task, the less the effect of the A/C secondary loads. The smallest ranges are attained in urban cycles at low temperatures. Constant speed driving at temperatures around 20 degC provide for the largest ranges.
power socket consumption in kWh ______ 100 km  _________________________ terminal consumption in kWh ______ 100 km  The charging system efficiency is affected by the losses from ancillary components , the losses from the on board charger during AC charging, and those from the wall charging station. The on board charger here has the task of converting the alternating current from the charging network into direct current with the right voltage for the battery.
Driving performance of electric vehicles The driving performance of electric vehicles is much more heavily dependent on temperature and the charge state of the energy accumulator than that of conventional vehicles. As the temperature decreases and with a low battery state of charge , the electric drivetrain delivers less power and consequently the top speed decreases and the acceleration time increases. At temperatures below freezing and with the battery at 50 % charge the maximum speed decreases to approximately 50 % of the nominal top speed, and the acceleration time from 0 to 100 km/h doubles.
Provision The Well to Tank path comprises the extraction of the primary sources of energy, the transportation of the raw materials, the manufacture of the fuel, and its distribution onward to the vehicle tank. Both energy losses and greenhouse gas and exhaust emissions arise in this step.
Different processes must be taken into account here, depending on the fuel. If there are different manufacturing paths for a fuel , the balance crucially depends on which manufacturing path is chosen. In other words, a fuel cannot be evaluated independently of how it is manufactured. The following examples show specific influencing factors for some fuels. Fossil gasolines and diesel fuels Fossil gasolines and diesel fuels For the provision of gasoline and diesel fuel the analysis includes above all the energies and emissions which are required for extracting the crude oil, for transporting, processing and refining the oil, and for distributing the fuel.
Biofuels Biofuels In the case of biogenous fuels, energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions arise during cultivation provided the biomass is cultivated specifically for energy use . Particularly crucial here are the manufacture and use of nitrogenated fertilizers as well as diesel consumption for working the cultivated areas. Agricultural production is not taken into account in the biofuels are produced from recyclings.
In the case of fuels produced from bio : mass, the amount of CO2 taken by the plants from the atmosphere as they grow are taken into account in the balance as a negative value. In this way the total amount of CO2 which is attributed to provision is reduced.
Credits During the production of biofuels by products are obtained from time to time which can be used for other purposes, e.g., glycerin in the manufacture of biodiesel or animal feed in the manufacture of bioethanol from grain. Provided the by products replace conventionally created products, saved emissions and energy consumption for the conventional manufacture of the product are credited to the biofuel. In this way energy consumption and emissions which are attributed to the biofuels are reduced. All in all, therefore, negative values can also be obtained for the CO2 emissions.
In the case of residual biomass, it must be borne in mind that this biomass under certain circumstances could have been used for other purposes . This lost alternative use reduces the advantages of the biofuel in the balance.
Natural gas Natural gas The provision path of natural gas is essentially described by the extraction, long distance transportation and compression of the gas to 200 bar at the filling station. Electricity Electricity If electricity is used directly for the vehicle drive or indirectly to create hydrogen or synthetic fuels, the current generation emissions are attributed to the fuel. Hydrogen Hydrogen Hydrogen can be obtained by steam reformation from natural gas. What must be taken into account in particular here are the long distance transportation of the natural gas, steam reformation, and compression of the hydrogen at the filling station.
If, however, hydrogen is obtained by electrolysis from water, the electrical energy used must be taken into consideration. The balance is then very much dependent on how the electrical energy is generated, since the emissions from energy generation are attributed to the hydrogen.
natural gas), and H2  8 % 7 % 0 % 26 % 32 % Domestic distribution 1 % 2 % 7 % 10 % 15 % Overall provision efficiency 79 % 81 % 87 % 54 % 54 %
Synthetic fuels: Synthetic fuels The synthesis of hydrogen into gaseous or liquid fuels can essentially be performed in one of two processes: methanation or by way of a Fischer Tropsch process. If for these processes CO2 is filtered out of the air and the hydrogen is obtained from regenerated electricity, the fuel produced can in the best case be greenhouse gasfree.
The generation of the starting substances hydrogen and CO2 or CO and the number of subsequent synthesis steps determine the energy losses which arise during the production of the various synthetic fuels .
Drive The fuel used and the drive efficiency are decisive for the fuel consumption and the local CO2 emissions of a vehicle. This is referred to as the Tank to Wheel efficiency and describes the ratio of drive energy which is output to the wheels to the energy content of the fuel consumed.
Defined driving cycles are used to compare the fuel consumption and the emissions of different drive concepts. This is in effect a driving profile with defined driving speeds and acceleration phases. For a standardized driving cycle the respective drive efficiency and the emissions can be determined for the different drive concepts.
Overall examination The provision path and the drive path are brought together in the Well to Wheel analysis . In the greenhouse gas balance the sum total of greenhouse gas emissions is given as a CO2 equivalent in g/km.
The CO2 equivalent takes into account as well as carbon dioxide further greenhouse gases, which are weighted according to their specific greenhouse effect. Reference vehicles and driving cycles are used as the basis for the balances.
different fossil and regenerative fuels the CO2 emissions which result from fuel provision . It must be borne in mind here, however, that the CO2 balance is very much dependent on the boundary conditions of fuel production and use such that the specified values are in no way generally applicable to the fuel in question.
Life cycle examination Life cycle examination A further analysis of greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption moves the focus of examination from the fuel to the vehicle. A life cycle examination for the vehicles takes into consideration, aside from operation of the vehicle, energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions that arise during the manufacture of the vehicle. Starting with raw material extraction, transportation, refinement, and processing, here too recycling is taken into consideration at the end of the vehicle's life . The results of this examination are very much dependent on the process paths used.
A more comprehensive examination of the environmental impacts is offered by a life cycle analysis . Such an analysis takes into account, as well as energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions, numerous additional environmental impacts such as for example land consumption, water consumption, and water pollution.
Figure 8: Greenhouse gas emissions from the provision and utilization of different fuels : in a vehicle with internal combustion engine or alternative drives. Source: SAE J2841: Utility Factor Definitions for Plug In Hybrid Electric Vehicles Using Travel Survey Data.
Aerodynamic drag Aerodynamic drag WL is given a lot of  attention in developing motor vehicles, because it has a direct impact on the  vehicle performance and fuel consumption. A critical variable here is the drag coefficient cW, which describes the aerodynamic quality of the shape of a body in a flow. The aerodynamic drag is also influenced by the frontal area Afx and the dynamic pressure q of the flow, which  depends on the air density r and the airflow velocity u.
around a wing and a hemisphere. Shedding results in vortices, and therefore pressure differences. Form drag is predominant for blunt bodies. For streamlined bodies, the friction component dominates; there is no turbulent shedding from the body's surface.
For the cW values for different bodies and car body shapes, refer to the various tables .
Induced drag Induced drag The difference in pressure above and below a vehicle in flow lead to superimposition of the main horizontal flow around the body. A vertical flow component arises through pressure equalization via the body sides, and wake turbulence develops, which causes the induced drag.
Interference drag Interference drag Interference drag is produced by the interaction of attachments . The total drag is not the sum of the drag forces of the individual parts, because the mutual interference has to be taken into account. Thus attachments can also cause the cW value to drop.
The impact of an exterior rearview mirror on the car body is shown here as an example . It causes the stagnation point to move toward the attachment; this results in asymmetrical flow around the car body. Consequently, there is a greater risk of shedding vortices, and that leads to an increasing cW value.
Buoyancy force: The curvature of the car's top surface causes the air to flow faster above the vehicle than under it, which generates an undesirable lift force . This reduces the tire contact forces and thereby has a negative impact on the directional stability. The lift coefficient cA is the sum of the lift coefficients on the front axle cAV and the rear axle cAH. The difference between the lift on the front and rear axles is referred to as "lift balance" and is a variable influencing directional stability.
The pitching moment M, which acts around the y axis, is often used as a  design variable instead. A positive pitching moment requires understeer, and a negative pitching moment requires oversteer. The rolling moment L around the x axis is disregarded with respect to aerodynamics.
Lateral force A car has an almost symmetrical shape when viewed from the front, which means that side forces generated by air flows are small. As soon as the approaching air flow deviates from the x axis .
The yawing moment N, which acts around the z axis, is also used as an indicator for crosswind sensitivity. This value is used to derive the yaw angle velocity and yaw angular acceleration, which  provide information about the negative impact of crosswind.
uo Velocity of the airflow  over the vehicle, uu Velocity of the airflow  between the vehicle and road, po Pressure above the vehicle, pu Pressure below the vehicle, A Lift.
Climbing resistance and acceleration resistance are zero during constant motion on a level stretch. The mileage is substantially determined by the aerodynamic drag, because it increases quadratically with the velocity and surpasses the other tractive resistances as of 80 km/h , the faster a vehicle can move with a suitable transmission ratio. At a constant velocity, a smaller drag area leads to lower fuel consumption. Consequently, the vehicle produces fewer emissions.
As a function of the low driving speeds in the New European Driving Cycle , however, the influence of the aerodynamic drag is greatly underestimated in the manufacturer/consumption data, which can lead to higher fuel consumption in everyday operation for the average driver.
UKK0023 2E 0 0 50 100 1,200 1,600 N 800 400 150 Driving speed km/h Drag force WA WR WL Convenience Draft prevention , wind noise, prevention of dirt buildup.
Cooling and ventilation Ventilation of brakes, engine compartment and components, engine cooling, cooling of units , intercooling, air conditioning, removing condensation from headlights.
Component forces Doors and cover, windows and sliding sunroof, vibration of mirrors, rear window fluttering, puffing up behavior of convertible top.
Directional stability: Directional stability, sensitivity of the steering behavior, lane change behavior, handling and crosswind sensitivity are critically influenced by the lift and side forces. The forces that can be transferred from the wheels to the road in the longitudinal and transverse directions can be no larger than the vertical force .
The lift acts against the vertical forces resulting from the weight. Consequently, the forces that can be transferred from the tires, above all during motion in a curve, can be reduced until there is a total loss of directional stability, depending on the driving speed and lift. The transferable braking forces also depend on the vertical wheel load, and therefore on the aerodynamic lift.
The task of aerodynamics is therefore to minimize the lift forces through means such as spoilers on the front and rear of a vehicle. For sports cars it can even happen that downforces greater than the weight are produced.
Lift balance Lift balance If the lift balance has a lift coefficient cAV on the front axle greater than cAH on the rear axle, there is a positive pitching moment and the design produces understeering driving behavior. Then if the speed in a curve is too high it will be noticed immediately when the steering angle is too high; the vehicle should be stabilized again by backing off the accelerator . Then if the speed in a curve is too high it will be perceived not through the steering wheel, but through the seat. Backing off the accelerator makes the vehicle unstable; it can be kept in the lane only with targeted countersteering and depressing the accelerator.
for various vehicle types 1 Passenger car, 2 Sports car, 3 Formula 3 racecar, 4 Indy car series, 5 Formula 1 racecar,  6 Le Mans racecar.
Cooling and ventilation The responsibility of aerodynamics consists in requirements based air intake, so that the heat generated by operating the vehicle is dissipated to the environment .
An intensive flow of cooling air can lead to a high internal drag, and therefore  increase the aerodynamic drag. Therefore a great deal of attention is given to achieving an optimum balance between cooling requirements and aerodynamics . To optimize the air intake, air inlets and outlets are located on the vehicle in zones with the greatest possible pressure difference for propulsion. The flow of cooling air can be controlled and adapted by changing the size of the respective openings. The cooling air is conducted through channels to the radiators, which should be designed to be as free of pressure loss and leaks as possible.
The same criteria also apply to an  exhaust air duct up to the air outlet. The air outlet should be positioned downstream with the least possible pressure loss. If it can be placed in a zone where there are already aerodynamic losses, these can be favorably reduced by the arising interference. For example, blowing out the cooling air ahead of the front wheel can form an air cushion and thereby guide the flow around the wheel with fewer losses, which nearly equalizes the cooling air drag .
The aerodynamic pressure losses can also be controlled by choosing suitable radiator cores and their dimensions, as well as fans and their frames. To entirely prevent cooling air drag with a low power requirement, electrically closable radiator shutters were introduced in series production back in 1987 . Today this measure is widely used in the premium class.
the cooling air ahead of the front wheel 1 Airflow approaching the radiator, 2 Airflow approaching the wheel, 3 Radiator, 4 Exhaust flow after the radiator and  air cushion ahead of the wheel.
1 Flow through radiator , 2 Air conditioning, 3 Front axle  gearbox cooling, 4 Fresh air intake, 5 Rear axle gearbox cooling, 6 Engine compartment  ventilation, 7 Brake ventilation, 8 Intercooling, 9 Cooling air outlet  from the intercooler.
Improvement of the aeroacoustics Improvement of the aeroacoustics By giving the basic body an aerodynamic shape you can reduce the local flow velocities, influence the flow direction, and prevent or limit turbulent shedding. Generally speaking, whatever reduces the cW value also leads to lower wind noise.
Freestanding attachments disrupt the flow around the basic body by creating additional flow separation. Therefore they should be positioned where they will produce the least possible disruption and their shape should be optimized. With component excitation, aerodynamics analyses the necessity and placement of reinforcement plates or damping measures.
In the case of flow over cavities . As an aerodynamic measure, the shear layer buildup is upset by interference flows, for example, using a wind deflector on the sliding sunroof.
The aeroacoustic quality is evaluated not : only by the spectral analysis, but also by taking into account psychoacoustic parameters. These parameters measure higher frequency noise components; consequently, subjective perception  and speech intelligibility are taken into account better. The sharpness is evaluated independently from loudness and roughness. The articulation index is a measure of speech intelligibility.
Dirt Dirt The wheels of your own vehicle kick up dirt particles, which settle on the surface of your vehicle . The magnitude and intensity of the contaminated surfaces are caused by local wake turbulence of the surrounding flow. The task of vehicle aerodynamics is to identify such turbulence and reduce it or transpose it to unproblematic zones. Great care is given to avoiding impaired visibility by keeping the windows and exterior mirrors free of dirt buildup.
Draft prevention Draft prevention Usually there are bothersome drafts when driving with the windows and roof open. This can be clearly observed in a convertible when the top is open, because there is shedding of the flow over a large area behind the windshield frame. A low pressure region behind the windshield is filled by a backflow. Backflows and turbulence cause the bothersome drafts . The vortices can be damped and significantly reduced by the mesh fabric of a windbreak. The task of vehicle aerodynamics is to determine the size and shape of this component as well as its mesh density.
Component forces Component forces arise from the pressure forces produced by the flow around the body , which vehicle aerodynamics has to determine empirically and increasingly also through calculations. The positive or negative pressure forces acting perpendicular to the outer skin increase along with the airflow velocity and act as a load on the components located there.
1 Flow separation at the top edge  of the windshield, 2 Flow around vehicle, 3 Unsteady vortex sheet, 4 Vortex direction of rotation in passenger compartment, 5 Airflow between the seats and between the seats and side panels, 6 Windbreak for reducing airflow  between the seats.
Vehicle wind tunnels: Application Aerodynamic measurements on roads are difficult, because the environmental conditions are neither uniform nor steady. The direction and steadiness of the conditions are constantly changing due to factors such as natural wind, buildings, and traffic. A vehicle wind tunnel is used to represent the air flow affecting a vehicle traveling on the road in an environment that is as realistic and reproducible as possible.
. For vehicle aerodynamics, Gottingen wind tunnels with an open test section or with slotted walls are used predominantly.
The diffuser contour can influence the : steadiness of the velocity profile at the  diffuser outlet in the test section, and parallelism in relation to the geometrical  tunnel axis.
A wind tunnel balance records the aerodynamic forces at work on the test vehicle and the moments of all four tire contact surfaces; it breaks these forces into x, y, and z components to calculate the aerodynamic parameters.
A wind tunnel balance is normally positioned below a turning platform, which is used to turn the vehicle in relation to the wind direction, and thus simulate the effect of side winds.
the road cannot be taken into account. : Therefore, in addition to wind tunnels with a stationary floor, there is now increased use of wind tunnels with moving belts incorporated into the floor to imitate motion of the car over the road and rotating wheels . The quality of the air flow between the vehicle and the road can thus be improved and made significantly more realistic.
Wind tunnel auxiliary systems Frontal area measuring system Frontal area measuring system The frontal area measuring system measures the frontal area of the vehicle by optical means. The results are then used to calculate the aerodynamic coefficients from the forces measured in the wind tunnel.
on test section floor  with flat belts incorporated 1 Moving belt between the wheels, 2 Balance, 3 Turning platform, 4 Wheel drive unit  with small moving belt.
Traversing cradle Traversing cradle The traversing cradle allows the measurement of the complete vehicle airflow field. Each position in the test section can be located by coordinates and reproduced. According to the sensors present at each point, the pressure, velocity, or noise sources at each location can then be determined.
Pollutant dispersion system Pollutant dispersion system The pollutant dispersion system can be used to spray the vehicle in the wind  tunnel with water ranging from light mist to heavy rain. The flow patterns can be  visualized and documented by mixing chalk or a fluorescent agent to the pollutant.
Hot water unit Hot water unit The hot water unit provides heated water at a constant rate for measuring radiator cooling capacity in prototypes that are not yet roadworthy.
Wind tunnel variants A vehicle wind tunnel is a major investment. This investment, combined with high operating costs, make it an expensive test environment with a high hourly rate. Only very frequent utilization of  vehicle wind tunnels for aerodynamic, aeroacoustic, and thermal experiments can justify the construction of several wind tunnels specialized for different tasks. Model wind tunnel Model wind tunnel A model wind tunnel can considerably reduce operating costs, due to the lower construction requirements and technical complexity. Depending on the scale , it is easier, faster, and more costeffective to change the shape of vehicle models.
Model tests are primarily used in the early development phase for optimizing the basic aerodynamic shape. With the support of designers, plasticine models are used in a wind tunnel to optimize shapes or develop complete alternative shape variants and establish their aerodynamic potential.
Once there is a data set, new production methods  can be used to quickly produce models to any scale with accurate details. This allows for important investigations of the models in order to optimize details, even after the shaping phase.
Acoustic wind tunnel: Acoustic wind tunnel In an acoustic wind tunnel, extensive sound insulation measures mean that the sound pressure level is approximately 30 dB from the useful signal of the vehicle to allow identification and evaluation of wind noises generated by the air circulation and throughflow.
Climate controlled wind tunnels Climate controlled wind tunnels Climate controlled wind tunnels are used for thermal analysis and protection of  vehicles in defined temperature ranges at different load conditions.
The vehicle is positioned on dynamometer rollers and driven at the required load condition or load cycle. Wind speed and roller speed must be exactly synchronized, even at low speeds. If necessary, uphill or downhill gradients can be simulated to introduce realistic road factors to the vehicle operating cycle.
The extensive aerodynamic challenges in vehicle design are not all covered by enhanced test bench simulations as described above. In addition to experimental testing, manufacturers are therefore making increasing use of CFD models . They  allow preliminary decisions to be made to reduce the test workload.
1 Fan, 2 Corner turning vanes, 3 Filters, 4 Radiator, 5 Rectifier, 6 Settling chamber, 7 Nozzle, 8 Balance and turning platform, 9 Test section, 10 Collectors, 11 Maneuvering plates, 12 Control room, 13 Computer room, 14 Central room, 15 Hoist, 16 Entrance, 17 Preparation rooms, 18 Model wind tunnel 1:4, 19 Control room for model wind tunnel. UKK0015Y
vehicle categories. On account of the inadequate effectiveness of these statutory provisions in real traffic, the measurement method has been revised with the aim of better reproducing urban traffic in the test procedure.
The new EU noise legislation Regulation 540/2014/EC applied in parallel in the EU has been in force since January 2016 and follows the same timeline as the EU Regulation. For the old legislation there are transitional provisions until July 2022 .
In addition, tread noise requirements were defined in the regulation 661/2009/ EC . Depending on the tires, the test area is 70 or 80 km/h.
80 Off road and four wheel drive vehicles These vehicles are governed by higher  additional limit values for engine brake and compressed air noises.
vehicles with more than four forward : gears, while sports cars are tested in third gear in accordance with the definition in the Directive. Vehicles with automatic transmissions are tested in the D position. The noise emissions level is defined as the maximum occurring sound level which is measured on the left and right sides of the vehicle at a distance of 7.5 m from the center of the lane. In a test in two gears, the noise emissions level is the arith metic mean from the measurement of both gears.
Measuring noise emissions  from moving trucks starting from  a permissible total weight of 3.5 t The vehicle approaches line AA, which is located up to 10 m from the microphone plane, at a constant velocity , which serves as the end of the test section. The driving speed adopted is dependent on the gear tested and the rated engine speed. The choice of gears selected is based on the fact that at least the rated speed must be reached within the test section, however, the vehicle must pass through the test section without reaching the engine speed limitation. The noise emissions level is defined as the maximum occurring sound level from all the measurements.
Measuring noise emissions  Measuring noise emissions  from stationary vehicles from stationary vehicles Following noise approval of a vehicle, measurement of noise emissions from stationary vehicles makes it possible to determine a reference noise value for the noise emissions of the vehicle in traffic when in "proper" condition. This makes it easier for the vehicle's noise emissions to be checked, for example, by the police or regulatory official. Noise emission from stationary vehicles is measured at a distance of 50 cm from the exhaust outlet at a horizontal angle of 45deg +10deg relative to the direction of exhaust flow. During the measurement, the engine has to be brought up to a speed dependent on its nominal speed. Upon reaching this test speed, it is to be maintained for 3 sec. and then the throttle response switch is to be quickly moved to the idle position. The maximum A weighted sound pressure level determined during this measurement is entered in the vehicle documentation with the suffix P' .
Minimum noise from vehicles When quiet electric motors began being widely used as a drive source for vehicles, it became a problem for pedestrians: They have great difficulty recognizing these  vehicles in traffic in a timely manner. Investigations have shown that this is particularly the case in the low speed range up to about 20 to 30 km/h. To reduce the danger of collisions between vehicles and pedestrians, work is currently being done to specify an international standard for minimum noise emissions. These provisions are mandatory from July 2019 for the new homologation of vehicles and mandatory from July 2021 for all newly approved vehicles.
10 m 10 m A G C P 3 2 B A P B 10 m 10 m 1 10 m 7,5 m 3 m SAN0026 3Y
nique enables noise to be recorded by microphones built into the ears of an artificial head. Artificialor dummyhead technology provides the opportunity of making realistic recordings, so that they can be compared with other similar recordings at a different place and time.
measurements are generally equipped with highly sound absorbent walls. Depending on the objective, these rooms can be equipped with chassis dynamometers, so that a vehicle can be evaluated even while in driving mode.
noise acceleration, sensors are used which operate, for example, according to the piezoelectric principle. Laser vibrometers are used for rapid, non contact measurements based on the Doppler principle.
tion of measuring the various cases of vibrational excitation in the overall vehicle, the body, or individual components. Hydropulsers permit excitation of low frequencies smaller than 150 Hz with large vibration paths for simulating road excitation. Shakers, on the other hand, permit high frequencies up to 2 kHz for simulating engine excitation.
Calculating methods in acoustics Vibrations and oscillations Vibrations and oscillations Natural vibration calculations are performed using the finite element method .
Ride comfort simulation Ride comfort simulation Effects of vibration from the road on the chassis and body can be simulated by  using rigid body models in combination with the road excitation. What is interesting here is that it is also possible to connect the drive unit via the engine mount and transmission mount. Such models  enable variable coordination of the chassis mount and power train mount, typically in the frequency range up to 50 Hz.
Sources of noise: Engine and transmission acoustics Engine noises are caused primarily by the mechanical movement of components. Even the combustion process in the cylinders causes excitations of the engine structure. In all cases, the vibrations are, on the one hand, directed through the structure and, on the other hand, radiated as airborne noise. In the process, noises can also occur dominantly at a clear distance from the excitation location. This is determined by the sensitivity of the membrane surfaces and the natural vibration response of the local structure.
Important sources of noise on the engine are the crankshaft drive, the camshaft drive, the crankcase, the oil pan, the cylinder head cover, the auxiliary power take offs .
Here, most of these are in a conflict of interests with other development disciplines, particularly space design , energy management and driving dynamics. Thus, in a four cylinder engine, the often dominant second engine order, which is frequently perceived as humming, can be significantly reduced with balancer shafts and very rigid units. But this comes at the expense of additional weight, more complicated structures and a considerable dip in performance.
Engine and transmission acoustics also has the task of largely reducing the transmission of rigid body sound vibrations to the body and the airborne noise. Starting points for this are the design of the power train mount with respect to insulation,  low vibration designs, short, compact connections of auxiliary units, and prevention of large, smooth vibration surfaces by means of ribbing or additional damping materials.
The engine mount deserves special  attention. Stiff assembly bearings improve driving dynamics, but convey to the driver a very raw engine noise and increase the vibration input into the body. If the bearings are too soft, it means the engine can move large distances, which can lead to unpleasant bucking motion of the whole vehicle. Highly insulating, hydraulically damped elements can be used to bring about a certain softness with good vibration comfort for the whole vehicle.
Gas exchange noise  The energy transmitted by the combustion processes to the inducted air is output in time with the ignition processes and the valve movements via the exhaust gas system to the surroundings again. The design of the exhaust manifolds, the exhaust pipes and the mufflers decisively affects which frequency components are radiated with which levels. Here, the sound output, not only at the orifice but also at the surface of all the components, is important. The noise dynamics of this acoustic source are enormous, easily reaching 15 dB and higher when the level difference is considered between idle and full load. On the basis of these dynamics, this source is ideally suitable for sound designs.
Chassis acoustics: Excitation from the road introduces vibrations into the chassis. These are strongly attenuated at first by the damping of the tires, but vibrations can still be transmitted in the chassis and into the body. Moreover, the road can incite natural resonance in the chassis, which can reach the passenger compartment in the form of unpleasant droning if the body has a certain sensitivity. Chassis acoustics has the task of finding an optimum acoustical configuration of the chassis without  impairing the dynamic handling characteristics of the vehicle.
Body acoustics The body is the interface between the chassis, power train and mounts of many auxiliary drives. These include, for example, fans, servomotors and even loudspeakers. The body, however, is also a point of attack for airflow forces. It surrounds the driver and passengers and protects them from external influences. But it also transmits vibrations and introduces them to the passenger compartment, where the occupants can both feel and hear them.
Body acoustics deals specifically with minimizing the transmission of sound and preventing airborne noise excitations, which, along with resonance in the passenger compartment, can lead to unpleasant droning noise. It also deals with optimizing the natural oscillation characteristics of the body, because the body's eigenmodes such as the torsion of the basic body or the first bending mode of the front end can lead to shaking of the vehicle, which feels like when the vehicle is very fluttery on the road.
High rigidity of the attachment points for the chassis and engine provide for low excitation, sealing the byways reduces the conduction of sound within the body, and damping materials provide for sufficient insulation.
Body acoustics also includes aeroacoustics, in which optimized transitions at  vehicle edges and flows around components should prevent turbulent flows from developing. These can make themselves apparent as unpleasant interior and  exterior noise at high speeds.
Ride comfort Ride comfort concerns all of the ride related components that the driver and passengers touch. In particular these include the steering wheel, shift lever, pedals, and of course the seat. Excitations can come from the road, body, or engine and are in the frequency range under 50 Hz. The  objective is to minimize all vibrations. Dynamic strength All vehicle components are subject to vibrational excitation, and therefore to dynamic loads. To ensure that all components have a sufficient dynamic load  capacity over a long time period, they have to be investigated with respect to their dynamic strength. To do so, individual components as well as entire assemblies are subjected to continuous loading on test benches by electrodynamic shakers or hydraulic punches. The excitation profiles are gained from load measurements from real driving profiles. If necessary, the components can also be tested with climatic adaptations, such as low or extremely high temperatures. Exhaust systems can, for example, have hot gases pumped through them to simulate the engine exhaust gases. These tests provide valuable indications for optimizing details, as a result of which materials, flanges or ribs are often optimized again.
Sound design: Definition of sound design Sound design is the active and specific matching of a product to a desired noise behavior. The aim is to lend the product a typical "sound" expected by the customer and corresponding to the brand identity and to arouse quite specific emotional  associations with the product.
The most well known field is the automobile sector, where both customers and the press show great interest in the result of the sound development of products. However, intensive work is also being carried out on the sound of products in many other fields, such as, for example, household appliances .
Terms other than sound design are also commonly encountered. Sound engineering is, as a rule, the concrete technical realization on the product, i. e. the specific technical implementation of a target sound elaborated in sound design.Sound cleaning is the suppression of unwanted noise to achieve an optimally neutral noise behavior. This is often carried out for luxury vehicles as a starting point for developing a discreet sound.
Sound at the vehicle The steps for implementing sound at a product, are generally speaking, always the same. For clarification purposes, this is explained by reference to the automobile sector.
Sound is the audible feedback of the vehicle at a specific operating state arrived at by the driver using the accelerator pedal and choosing a gear. Sound is accordingly described by the engine's operating point with regard to engine revs and load, as well as their time variance i. e. acceleration, steady state driving or deceleration. Starting and idle noises are added.
Depending on the design, the subjective perception of the throttle response is "spontaneous" or "sluggish", regardless of the real physically measurable acceleration.
A distinction is made between a vehicle's interior and exterior noises. Exterior noise is shaped by the airborne noise  radiation of all the components, primarily by the engine and the exhaust gas and air intake systems and their orifices. In  addition to these, there is disruptive noise from rolling and the wind. The acoustic conditions in the passenger compartment are additionally influenced by the structure borne noise and the acoustic transfer paths through the body.
Sound quality Sound quality refers to discrete components that can be actively moved or changed, such as switches, levers, servomotors, or flaps. Here, the actuating noise is intended to underline the quality and the soundness of the product. Opening and closing doors and hoods also has to sound good and must not be jarring.
Moreover, sound quality also includes prevention of rattling, grinding and squeaking noises produced by components touching and rubbing against each other.
Assessment methods Psychoacoustics Psychoacoustics Sound cannot be assessed with the standard assessment method based on loudness, roughness or tonality. When the sound of a vehicle is mentioned, for the most part terms such as "sporty", "sonorous", "aggressive" or "inspiring" are used. These must be translated into a technical language so that the development engineers know at a later stage what spectral content, what dynamics and what time variances are responsible for them. For this reason, these subjective factors are being increasingly brought into play and
Virtual prototyping Virtual prototyping Analyses and measurements conducted on components can be used to make predictions about sound behavior and the leeway for making modifications. Vehicle measurements are also made using artificial head technology. Variations can then be simulated in a narrow range with modern computer technology, always with a view toward whether a "virtually created sound" can also be technically realized. Now the virtual sounds processed using computer technology can be evaluated by test subjects with respect to previously developed evaluation criteria. From this, it is possible to derive assessor preferences, which are now, however, technically stored and provide indications as to which frequency elements are necessary or offending and which components come into consideration.
Active sound Active sound Of course, missing sound elements can also be provided with active speaker systems inside and outside the vehicle. This technology is currently gaining ever more importance, because electric vehicles and hybrid vehicles in electric driving mode are frequently evaluated as being too quiet. Significant improvements can be achieved here by adding electronic sound.These provisions are mandatory from July 2019 for the new homologation of vehicles and mandatory from July 2021 for all newly approved vehicles .
________________________________ References References Commission Directive 2007/34/EC of 14 June 2007 amending, for the purposes of its adaptation to technical progress, Council Directive 70/157/EEC concerning the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles.
 Regulation No. 540/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on the sound level of motor vehicles and of replacement silencing systems, and amending Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directive 70/157/EEC.
 UN R51 03: Uniform Provisions Concerning the Approval of Motor Vehicles Having a Least Four Wheels with Regard to their Sound Emissions.
 Regulation No 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning type approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles, their trailers and systems, components and separate technical units intended therefor.
 L. C. Wrobel, M. H. Aliabadi: The Boundary Element Method. 1st ed., Wiley, 2002.
Terms and definitions: Lubricants Lubricants provide mutual insulation for components in a state of relative motion. The lubricant's function is to prevent direct contact between these components, thereby reducing wear and minimizing friction. Lubricants serve as coolants, friction surface sealants, and corrosion inhibitors, and can also reduce running noise. Lubricants may be solid, consistent, liquid, or gaseous in form. Specific lubricants are selected with reference to design characteristics, materials combinations, the ambient conditions, and the stress factors encountered at the friction surface .
Additives Additives are substances mixed into the lubricant in order to improve specific properties. These substances modify either the lubricant's physical characteristics . Great care must be exercised in order to ensure that the additives are correctly matched with each other and with the base lubricant.
ATF ATF .
Bleeding Bleeding is the separation of base oil . During this process the lube oil is released to the lubricating surroundings.
Fire point and flash point The lowest temperature .
Cloud point The cloud point is the temperature at which mineral oil becomes opaque due to the formation of paraffin crystals or precipitation of other solids . They serve as cleaning agents which like a tenside contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic areas.
Flow pressure The flow pressure is the pressure required to press a consistent lubricant through a standardized test nozzle . The flow pressure is an index of a lubricant's starting flow characteristics, particularly at low temperatures.
Yield point: The yield point is the shear stress at which a substance begins to flow. Above the yield point, the rheological characteristics of plastic substances are the same as those of liquids .
Friction modifiers Friction modifiers are polar lubricant additives which reduce friction in the mixed friction range  and increase bearing capacity after adsorption on the surface of the metal. They also inhibit stick slip behavior.
Anti friction coatings Anti friction coatings are solid lubricant combinations which a binding agent holds in place on the friction surfaces .
Graphite Graphite is a solid lubricant with layer lattice structure. Graphite provides excellent lubrication when combined with water  and in carbon dioxide atmospheres or when combined with oils. It does not inhibit friction in a vacuum.
Borderline pumping temperature The borderline pumping temperature is the application limit for oil throughput through engines after cold starting. Below the borderline pumping temperature oil can no longer flow of its own accord to the oil pump, and thus a sufficient supply of oil can no longer be guaranteed.
High pressure lubricants High pressure lubricants .
Hydro crack oils Hydro crack oils are refined mineral oils with increased viscosity index . They are produced by hydrogenating mineral oils and are thus more thermally stable and have improved viscosity temperature characteristics.
Induction period The induction period is the time which elapses before substantial changes occur in a lubricant .
Inhibitors Inhibitors are active system protecting ingredients which slow down the chemical decomposition of lubricants .
Low temperature sludge Low temperature sludges are the products of oil degradation which form in the engine crankcase due to incomplete combustion and condensate at low engine load. Low temperature sludge increases wear and can cause engine damage.
High lubricity oils: High lubricity oils are lubricating oils with multigrade properties, low cold viscosity, and special anti friction additives. Extremely low engine friction under all operating conditions reduces fuel consumption.
Multigrade oils Multigrade oils are engine and transmission oils with good resistance to viscosity temperature change . They often contain polymers which change their solid structure as a function of temperature. When the oil is cold, the molecules in the oil are "bunched together". As the temperature increases, the molecules stretch and thereby increase the friction between the particles. The viscosity of the oil increases, thereby guaranteeing a stable lubricating film even at high temperatures. Multigrade oils reduce friction and wear, and during cold starting ensure that all the engine components are quickly lubricated. These oils are formulated for year round use in motor vehicles; their viscosity ratings extend through several SAE grades.
Metal soaps Metal soaps are reaction products from metals or from their compounds with fatty acids. They are used as thickeners for grease and as friction modifiers.
Mineral oils Mineral oils are distillates or raffinates produced from petroleum or coal. They consist of numerous hydrocarbons in various chemical compositions. Classification is according to the predominant component: paraffin based oils . These substances are distinguished by major variations in their respective chemical and physical properties.
Molybdenum disulfide Molybdenum disulfide .
0 20 40 60 80 100 degC 1,000 300 100 40 20 10 5 Kinematic viscosity Temperature SAE 30 Single grade oil SAE 0W 30 Multigrade oil mm2 s 1 SAE 60 50 40 30 20  0 5 10 15 20 25 W SAE
softer the lubricant . Polar substances Dipolar molecules are easily adsorbed onto metal surfaces. They enhance adhesion and bearing capacity, thus reducing friction and wear. This category includes, for example, diester oils, ethers, polyglycols, and fatty acids.
Pour point Pour point is the lowest temperature at which an oil continues to flow when cooled under defined conditions .
PTFE PTFE . PTFE only becomes brittle below approx. 270 degC. The upper service temperature for use is approx. 260 degC. Above this level, it decomposes with toxic cleavage products.
Rheology Rheology is the science dealing with the flow characteristics of materials. These are generally represented in the shape of flow curves . In the diagram shear stress t is plotted against shear rate g..
u velocity, y thickness of lubricating film. The flow curves are usually measured in a plate cone measuring system. The sample to be measured is located between the plate and the cone; the torque is proportional to the shear stress and the rotational speed proportional to the shear rate.
rate in the lubricating gap 1 Moving plate, 2 Fluid, 3 Fixed plate. A Shear surface, F Shear force, h Height, u Velocity, g. Shear rate.
HTHS viscosity HTHS viscosity The HTHS viscosity specifies the shear viscosity at a temperature of 150 degC and a shear rate of 106 s 1.
Kinematic viscosity Kinematic viscosity The kinematic viscosity n is usually determined in vertical, narrow glass tubes. The time the fluid needs at a defined temperature to flow through a specific section of the tube is measured. If density r is known, it is also possible to calculate the shear viscosity e from it.
Newtonian fluids Newtonian fluids Newtonian fluids display a linear relationship between shear stress t and shear rate g. in the shape of a straight line through zero, with the slope increasing as a function of viscosity .
Intrinsically viscous flow behavior Intrinsically viscous flow behavior Intrinsically viscous flow behavior is the capacity of a fluid to show decreasing viscosities with increasing shear rate .
Dilatant flow behavior Dilatant flow behavior Dilatant flow behavior is the increase in viscosity with increasing shear rate .
lubricating oils acc. to ISO 3448 ISO  viscosity grade Medium viscosity at 40 degC in mm2/s Limits of kinematic viscosity at 40 degC in mm2/s min.
ISO VG 2   2.2   1.98   2.42 ISO VG 3   3.2   2.88   3.52 ISO VG 5   4.6   4.14   5.06 ISO VG 7   6.8   6.12   7.48 ISO VG 10  10   9.00  11.0 ISO VG 15  15  13.5  16.5 ISO VG 22  22  19.8  24.2 ISO VG 32  32  28.8  35.2 ISO VG 46  46  41.4  50.6 ISO VG 68  68  61.2  74.8 ISO VG 100  100  90.0  110 ISO VG 150  150  135  165 ISO VG 220  220  198  242 ISO VG 320  320  288  352 ISO VG 460  460  414  506 ISO VG 680  680  612  748 ISO VG 1000 1,000  900 1,100 ISO VG 1500 1,500 1,350 1,650 ISO VG 2200 2,200 1,980 2,420 ISO VG 3200 3,200 2,880 3,520
Dropping point: The dropping point is the temperature at which a lubricating grease attains a specified viscosity under specified test conditions .
Stribeck curve The Stribeck curve portrays friction levels between two liquidor grease lubricated tribological systems separated by a narrowing gap . As the relative speed increases, so too does the hydrodynamic pressure in friction contact.
Solid body friction Solid body friction In the case of solid body friction, the height of the lubricating film is lower than that of the roughness protrusions in the material's surface. This causes wear.
Mixed friction Mixed friction In the case of mixed friction, the height of the lubricating film is approximately equal to that of the roughness protrusions. This still means increased wear because the roughness protrusions are in contact with each other.
Hydrodynamics Hydrodynamics In the case of hydrodynamics, there is complete separation between the primary body and the opposed body, e.g. when aquaplaning .
Synthetic oil Synthetic oil is manufactured in a process of chemical synthesis from smaller molecules. For example, synthetic hydrocarbons in the form of poly a olefins, which are manufactured by the polymerization and subsequent hydrogenation of ethylene. Further synthetic oils are polyglycols, diester oils, silicone oils, and perfluoropolyether oils.
Viscosity Viscosity is a measure of the internal friction of substances .
R Surface roughness, FN Normal force, d Distance between primary and opposed body. Range a: Solid body friction, high wear. Range b: Mixed friction, moderate wear. Range c: Hydrodynamics, no abrasive wear. UAM0002 4E Coefficient of friction f Sliding velocity u a d  0 b d  R c d > R d FN FN FN u u u
Engine oils: Engine oils are employed primarily to lubricate contiguous components in relative motion within the internal combustion engine. The oil also removes heat generated by friction, carries abraded particles away from the friction surface, washes out contaminants, holds them in suspension, and protects metals against corrosion. The most common engine oils are mineral oils treated with additives and the additive composition.
for transmission oils min.
compared with A3 occasioned by lower viscosity including improved additive composition. Only for use in engines which have been specifically designed for this purpose.
"fuel economy" properties, also satisfies VW 50600 and 50601. Only for use in engines which have been specifically designed for this purpose.
parison with the predecessor category : CCMC D5, these oils evince a significant improvement in soot dispersion capability and a much reduced tendency to thicken; withdrawn.
Euro III standards and high requirements, particularly for extended intervals between oil changes . Based to a large extent on MB Specification Sheet 228.5.
recirculation) with/without diesel particulate filters and SCR NOx engines . Recommendation for engines with diesel particulate filters and operation with sulfur free fuel, sulfate ash less than 1 % by mass.
Example of a designation Example of a designation According to the grade specification, a numerical code is usually supplemented. Example: An A3/B3 04 is an engine oil for spark ignition engines of quality category 3, tested accord to the ACEA classification grade issued in 2004.
der very stringent conditions. Exceeds API CD and CE. Fuel sulfur content less than 0.5 %. Required for engines compliant with post 1994 emission control legislation.
2016/17 generation with low HTHS among others to meet the required emission stipulations in the USA.
ILSAC ILSAC is a joint standard of General Motors, Daimler, the Japanese Automobile Manufacturers Association, and the American Engine Manufacturers Association.
ILSAC GF 5 ILSAC GF 5 This standard has been in force since October 2010 with the aim of increased fuel reduction, elastomer compatibility, and improved protection of the exhaust gas treatment systems .
ILSAC GF 6 New specification with the aim of fuel economy for gasoline direct injection and turbocharged engines, expected around 2018. GF 6 A with conventional viscosities, GF 6B with viscosities <= SAE 0W16. SAE viscosity grades grades are the internationally accepted standard for defining viscosity. It provides information on the temperature range in which the oils are used. The standard provides no information on the quality of the oil.
A distinction is drawn between single grade and multigrade oils. Single grade oils are designated for example by SAE 30. Low code numbers denote thin bodies oils, higher code numbers denote more viscous oils.
ter) is used to define specific cold flow properties. These oils are also suitable for low temperatures. The viscosity grades including the letter "W" are rated according to maximum cold viscosity, maximum viscosity pumping temperature and the minimum viscosity at 100 degC.
Motorcycle oil This essentially is no different from oil for automobiles. However, the stress for example with regard to shear load and specific surface pressure is if necessary higher and only the oils recommended by the manufacturer may be used.
Oil dilution When vehicles are operated in short distance service, unburned fuel can mix with engine oil and can even cause deficient lubrication conditions.
Transmission oils: Specifications for transmission oils are defined by the type of transmission and the stresses to which it is subjected throughout the entire range of operating conditions. The requirements can only be satisfied by lubricants treated with special additives. In contrast to engine oils, transmission oils contain no, or only minimal, detergent additives, considerably fewer basic constituents, and mostly no viscosity index improvers. Most of them would be sheared and thus become inactive. The use of unsuitable and qualitatively inferior oils results typically in damage to bearings and gear tooth flanks.
ble 3). Transmission oils with roughly the same viscosity compared with engine oils are identified by higher code numbers so that they can be clearly distinguished from engine oils.
Synthesized oils are being increasingly used to meet special requirements . Advantages over standard mineral oils include superior temperature viscosity properties and increased aging resistance.
moderate stressed hypoid gear transmissions, and for transmissions which operate at extreme speeds and impact loads, high rotational speeds and low torques, or low rotational speeds and high torques.
stressed hypoid gear transmissions in passenger cars and in other vehicles where they are exposed to impact loads at high rotational speeds, and at high rotational speeds and low torques, or low rotational speeds and high torques.
Lubricants for automatic transmissions Automatic transmissions differ from their manual shifted counterparts in the way they transfer torque; non positive mechanical and hydrodynamic force transfer is supplemented by friction coupling arrangements. Thus, the friction response of automatic transmission fluids is extremely important. Applications are basically classified according to the friction characteristics.
Lubricating oils: Lubricating oils comprise the components of basic oil and additive. The additives improve the properties of the basic oils, e.g. with regard to oxidation stability, corrosion protection, protection against scoring and seizure, or viscosity temperature characteristics. In addition, system properties such as friction and wear are optimized in the desired direction.
Lubricating greases Lubricating greases are thickened lubricating oils. A great advantage that greases enjoy over oil is that they do not drain from the friction surfaces. Complicated measures to seal them in place are therefore unnecessary .
Mineral oils are usually employed as the basic oil component, although full synthetic oils have recently become more common as a replacement .
Poly a olefins Alkyl aromatics Diester oils Polyhydric alcohol Silicones Phenyl ether oils Perfluoropolyethers Metal soaps of metals  Li, Na, Ca, Ba, Al Normal soaps   Hydroxy soaps   (soaps with an additional hydroxide group, e.g.
12 hydroxystearic acid Complex soaps   Adhesion improvers Detergents, dispersants VI improvers Solid lubricants
The additives serve to modify physical and chemical properties of the lubricating grease to achieve specific objectives .
Selection Specific lubricating greases are selected with reference to their physical characteristics and their effects on the friction surface, and to minimize interaction between the grease and the contact materials. Mutually antagonistic effects with polymers are, for example: formation of stress cracks , consistency changes, polymer degradation, swelling, shrinkage, and brittleness.
Thus, for example, mineral oil greases and greases based on synthetic hydrocarbons should not come in contact with elastomers used together with brake fluid .
In addition, lubricating greases with varying compositions should not be mixed . Oxidation, for example, results in acidification, which can trigger corrosion on metal surfaces or stress cracking on some plastics. In the event of excessive thermal load, polymerization can cause the lubricant to solidify.
to DIN ISO 2137  in units of 0.1 mm 000 445...475 00 400...430  0 355...385  1 310...340  2 265...295  3 220...250  4 175...205  5 130...160  6  85 to 150  
Every chemical change automatically : causes a change in physical properties. These include the rheological properties as well as changes in the viscosity temperature characteristics or the dropping point. A marked lowering of the dropping point would result in the lubricant flowing away from the friction surface, even at moderate heat.
It is particularly important to remember that metals such as iron or copper  .
Lubricants for high voltage requirements Stronger electric alternating fields than previously occur with increasing operating voltage in alternators and electric motors. This can give rise for example in the ball bearings of motors or alternators to electric discharges between the rolling elements and the raceway. Sparks flash over and can cause tiny areas of the metal to melt. This is called electrical pitting and can cause premature bearing failure. The energy of these discharges will in future be potentially greater if power density and vehicle system voltage increase, e.g. 400 to 1000 V in electric and hybrid vehicles. Without suitable countermeasures there is a high risk of premature bearing damage, initially discernible from increased bearing noise. By reducing the specific resistance of the roller bearing greases by magnitudes of around 5, for example with ionic liquids, it is possible to reduce dramatically the number and the energy of the discharges.
 DIN EN ISO 2592: Petroleum products Determination of flash and fire points  Cleveland open cup method ; German version EN ISO 2592:2002.
the resulting effects Stress Lubricant thermal mechanical Effects on: Chemical changes Oxidation Polymerization Resinification Hydrolysis Viscosity Yield point Dropping point Consistency Physical changes Interaction with friction mating surface Stress cracking in plastics Static friction Hysteresis Reflow properties Corrosion protection Wear protection Production function and lifetime SAM0144E
 ASTM D 445a: Standard Test Method for Kinematic Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque Liquids .
 ASTM D 5293: Standard Test Method for Apparent Viscosity of Engine Oils and Base Stocks Between 10 and 35 degC Using Cold Cranking Simulator .
 ASTM D 4684: Standard Test Method for Determination of Yield Stress and Apparent Viscosity of Engine Oils at Low Temperature .
 ASTM D 4683: Standard Test Method for Measuring Viscosity of New and Used Engine Oils at High Shear Rate and High Temperature by Tapered Bearing Simulator Viscometer at 150 degC .
 ASTM D 5481: Standard Test Method for Measuring Apparent Viscosity at High Temperature and High Shear Rate by Multicell Capillary Viscometer .
Composition of coolants Customary coolants for engine cooling circuits consist of a mixture of water with a radiator protection agent approved by the automobile and engine manufacturers. The volume percentage of the radiator protection agent is for the most part between 40 % and 50 %.
results in faster inhibitor consumption and possible after effects such as, for example, flocculation of low solubility reaction products, corrosion of circuit components, through to blockage of cooling ducts.
diol . The operating pressure of a passenger car cooling circuit is in normal operation typically approximately 1.5 bar overpressure, under full load and in high performance engines up to 2.5 bar and higher.
In the strict sense, with glycol water mixtures there is not a defined freezing point, but an ice flaking point at which ice crystals begin to separate out in the fluid. At this temperature, the fluid medium can still be pumped through the cooling circuit. The heat capacity of glycol water mixtures is reduced compared with water from the main.
Since water/glycol mixtures demonstrate similar corrosivity to water from the main compared with metals, inhibitor systems are additionally admixed with the radiator protection agents.
Types of radiator protection agents Radiator protection agents can essentially be classified into three groups, which differ with regard to the inhibitor systems used.
Conventional radiator protection agents containing silicate Inhibitors and additives Inhibitors and additives These radiator protection agents contain primarily inorganic inhibitors such as, for example, silicate, nitrite, nitrate or molybdate. Organic inhibitors such as toluene or benzotriazole are also used.
To keep the pH value at the desired alkaline level over the entire period of use, buffer substances such as borate, phosphate, benzoate or imidazole are added to the radiator protection agent.
Conventional radiator protection agents containing silicate have proved themselves in practice over decades. Particularly the proportion of silicate has counteracted the dangerous hot corrosion of aluminum engine through the formation of thin, protective coatings.
Service life Service life However, the drawback of this type of radiator protection agent is that it is not possible to select the concentrations of the inhibitor systems at any level owing to the low solubility of some additives. On the other hand, the inorganic inhibitors are reduced during driving operation; however, the necessary minimum concentrations of inhibitors may not be undershot here. Consequently, the service life of such a radiator protection agent is limited to around three years driving or 100,000 km . This service life can be significantly reduced for example by the high thermal load of the cooling circuit in modern high performance engines.
OAT radiator protection agents OAT radiator protection agents contain a combination of organic inhibitors instead of conventional inorganic inhibitors. Typical combinations are aliphatic monoand dicarboxylic acids, azelaic acid and aromatic carboxylic acids, sebacic acid and benzotriazole. The combination of an inorganic inhibitor and carboxylic acid is also used. Pure OAT products, however, contain no silicate.
In contrast to conventional radiator protection agents containing silicate, the inhibitors in OAT radiator protection agents decrease must more slowly in driving operation. This enables to service life of the radiator protection agents to be increased and the maintenance requirement to be reduced.
Hybrid radiator protection agents To combine the good long term durability of OAT radiator protection agents with the good hot corrosion protection of silicate inhibitors, hybrid radiator protection agents have been developed which contain a harmonized combination of both inhibitor types. In this way, local hot corrosion can be prevented by the rapid formation of silicate protective coatings, while good long term corrosion protection, even after the consumption of silicate inhibitors, is provided by the more stable OAT inhibitors.
This on the one hand satisfies the demand for low maintenance coolants, but on the other hand also takes into account the high thermal loads of modern engine technologies. Therefore these hybrid radiator protection agents, sometimes also called Si OAT radiator protection agents, are today frequently used by major vehicle manufacturers for the initial fill.
Requirements: Passenger cars and light commercial vehicles are equipped with hydraulic brake systems. A hydraulic medium transmits and converts the braking force from the brake pedal in the brake master cylinder into hydraulic pressure, which is routed via brake lines to the wheel brake and there converted back into braking force. Vehicle dynamics control systems such as the antilock braking system or the electronic stability program can additionally modulate the hydraulic pressures at each wheel to prevent the wheels from locking through pressure reductions or to stabilize the handling through additional pressure build ups. This medium is therefore subject to the following requirements.
Low compressibility The basic requirement with regard to the hydraulic medium brake fluid for effective power transmission is very low compressibility. The liquid state of aggregation must be maintained in the entire operating range for this purpose.
Water absorption capacity During driving water can penetrate into the brake system at the wheels, particularly through the flexible brake hoses usually made from rubber material. If this water is not bound by the brake fluid, compressible water vapor bubbles can form at temperatures above 100 degC. Consequently, no further pressure can be generated when the brake pedal is pressed because initially the compressible water vapor is compressed. This failure of the brakes is called "vapor lock". Consequently, the market has seen the widespread acceptance of brake fluids which are completely mixable with water and exclude the presence of unbound, free water. Mineral oil based brake fluids also commonly used in the past have in practical terms been completely superseded by chemically glycol based brake fluids .
Characteristics : Boiling point During braking the temperature at the wheel brake cylinders increases, in extreme cases .
The boiling point of the hygroscopic glycol based brake fluid decreases significantly as a result of water absorption. Consequently, the risk of a "vapor lock" increases accordingly at high wheel brake temperatures.
Wet boiling point Wet boiling point The equilibrium boiling point of the brake fluid after a precisely specified procedure of water absorption is defined as the wet boiling point and is intended to depict the boiling point of a brake fluid used for two to three years.
A significant development trend on the part of the brake fluid manufacturers in previous years was to increase the boiling point with increased water content.
SAE1269 2E Boiling point Lower limit DOT 5.1 Lower limit Class 6 Lower limit DOT 4 Lower limit DOT 3 0 160 140 180 200 220 240 260 280 degC 1 1 2 2 3 4 % Water content
example the dependence of viscosity on : temperature for two brake fluids. This has a clearly non linear characteristic particularly at low temperature. As a general "rule of thumb": a 1 K reduction in temperature produces approximately a 10 % increase in viscosity. Likewise, approximately a 10 % increase in viscosity results at low temperature additionally from a 1 % increase in water content. This effect is another reason why the brake fluid should be changed.
Corrosion protection FMVSS 116 stipulates that brake fluids shall exercise no corrosive effect on those metals generally employed in brake systems. Appropriate additives guarantee the required corrosion protection, which is checked beyond required upper limits in high temperature storage tests of metal plates in dry and in wet brake fluids.
Elastomer swelling Elastomers are used as seals and gaskets in the brake system, for example in the brake master cylinder, in vehicle dynamics control systems, and in hoses. Although a small amount of elastomer swelling is desirable and taken into account in the design of the sealing rings, it should not exceed 10 % under any circumstances; otherwise, it has a negative effect on the strength of these components.
temperature and water content from the example of two brake fluids 1 SAE reference brake fluid with 5 % water, 2 SAE reference brake fluid  without water , 3 Modern brake fluid with 5 % water, 4 Modern brake fluid without water.
It constitutes the first combination of the two development trends of increased wet boiling point and reduced cold viscosity. This trend towards higher wet boiling points and low cold viscosities will continue and combine. Increasingly "modern" brake fluids are being developed and offered. In addition, the functionality of the vehicle dynamics control systems e.g., vehicle speed controller including brake intervention as ACC and electronic stability program with comprehensive additional functions right up to automated driving.
This also renders necessary in future in the brake fluid standards requirements, e.g., with regard to the lubricity of the brake fluid, in order to reduce wear. The same also applies to avoid noise when operating the brake master cylinder and clutch, which in the meantime is increasingly operated in manual transmissions with brake fluid. Working groups, particularly within the SAE and ISO, and the pfp TriNoWe Silicone oil based brake fluids are now only used in a few special applications, e.g. in motor sport, in which very short maintenance intervals are possible.
compressibility. Furthermore, they are like mineral oils not hygroscopic and therefore not able to absorb water that penetrates into the brake system. For this reason, they are also called "Low Water Tolerant" brake fluids.
Mineral oil fluids are known from mineral oil technology. These were used previously for example in vehicles with central hydraulics, but are now no longer significant because they like silicone based fluids cannot bind water.
________________________________ References References SAE J1704: Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid Based Upon Glycols, Glycol Ethers and the Corresponding Borates.
Paraffins Paraffins Paraffins are linear, isoparaffins branched and cycloparaffins closed chain hydrocarbons in which the atoms are linked to each other by single bonds. Molecules with single bonds are chemically less reactive. Aliphatic compounds Aliphatic compounds Paraffins belong to the class of aliphatic compounds. Aliphatic compounds cover all linear, branched and closed chain hydrocarbons whose molecules have one or more single bonds, one or more isolated multiple bonds or a combination of both types of bond. Molecules which exhibit an aromatic system are not classed as aliphatic compounds.
SAO0010 3E Fuel gases Residue Residue Bitumen Desalinization Crude oil Products Intermediate products Vacuum distillation Raw material Processes Hydrotreating and desulfurization Methane, ethane Liquefied petroleum gas Gasolines light/ heavy
Distillation under atmospheric pressure Distillation under atmospheric pressure The process is begun with a distillation of the crude oil under atmospheric pressure, in which different substance streams of predominantly volatile components are produced. Depending on their composition, these substance streams form the basis for liquefied petroleum gas , gasoline, kerosene, and for the more volatile part of diesel fuel and fuel oil.
Distillation under vacuum Distillation under vacuum The remaining residue from the atmospheric distillation is further separated under vacuum. These fractions form the basis for the heavier components in diesel fuel and fuel oil and for light and heavy marine fuels. During vacuum distillation too a residue is left, which is processed into heavy fuel oil and bitumen.
Further processing Further processing The ratio and the quality of the product fractions obtained by distillation do not yet meet market requirements such that further processing in complex chemical processes is required in the refinery. Aside from the widely known desulfurization, larger molecules can be cracked purely thermally or in the presence of catalysts . If this process is performed in the presence of hydrogen, it is known as hydrotreating or hydrocracking. Additional shorter chain components can be produced from heavy oil for diesel fuel by hydrocracking.
Addition of biofuels and additives Addition of biofuels and additives Today proportions of biofuels are added to many fossil fuels worldwide. Certain properties of biofuels can be specifically used to satisfy the fuel grade requirements. For example, bioethanol increases the octane number of gasoline and adding biodiesel to diesel fuel ensures sufficient lubricity. Additives are often also used to further improve product quality. Additives are active substances which are added to specifically adjust certain fuel properties.
Characteristics: Boiling range and ignition temperature The boiling range of gasoline is between 30 degC and 210 degC, and that of diesel fuel between 160 degC and 370 degC. Diesel fuel ignites on average at approximately 350 degC .
Net calorific value Normally, the net calorific value Hi is specified for the energy content of fuels; it corresponds to the usable heat quantity released during full combustion.
The gross calorific value Hs , on the other hand, specifies the total reaction heat released and therefore comprises, as well as the mechanically usable heat, the latent heat created in the water vapor. However, this component is not used in the vehicle.
The net calorific value Hi of diesel fuels is in the range of 42.9 through 43.1 MJ/kg and is slightly higher than the calorific value of gasoline would in many existing vehicles result in a noticeable reduction of performance and in significantly higher fuel consumption.
Calorific value of air/fuel mixture This is the calorific value of the combustible air/fuel mixture. It is dependent on the air/fuel ratio and determines the engine's power output. With a stoichiometric air/ fuel ratio, this is roughly 3.5 3.7 MJ/m3 for all liquid fuels and liquefied petroleum gases.
Sulfur content In the interests of reducing sulfur dioxide emissions and protecting the catalytic converters for exhaust gas treatment, the sulfur content of gasolines and diesel fuels was limited for vehicle applications on a Europe wide basis to 10 mg/kg as from 2009. Fuels which adhere to this limit value are known as "sulfur free fuels". In this way, the final stage of the desulfurization of fuels is achieved.
Since 2017 in the US too the average sulfur content of gasoline which is supplied commercially to end consumers has been no more than 10 mg/kg, with individual exceptions being permitted, e.g., up to 80 mg/kg for refineries and up to 95 mg/kg in downstream areas. All sulfur free diesel fuels for onand off road vehicles may not contain more than 15 mg/kg sulfur in the US.
In China the sulfur content of gasolines and diesel fuels may not exceed 10 mg/kg. With the next stage of emissions legislation for on road vehicles in India the fuels containing up to 50 mg/kg sulfur still available on the market have since 2020 been gradually replaced by sulfur free products.
Gasoline: Fuel grades Super fuels in Germany Super fuels in Germany In Germany two Super fuels with 95 octane are available; these differ in their ethanol content and may contain a maximum 5 % , which in comparison with the Super fuels with 95 octane are changed in terms of basic quality and additives.
Fuels in the USA Fuels in the USA Three different types of fuel are sold in the USA: Regular ethanol. The addition of components containing oxygen increases the octane number and satisfies the requirements of modern, higher compression engines with regard to improved knock resistance.
ther country specific characteristics are set out in the national appendices to this standard. Leaded gasolines are no longer permitted in virtually all markets worldwide and by 2020 were only available in a few countries, e.g., Algeria and Iraq. The US specifications defining fuels for gasoline engines are contained in ASTM D4814 .
kPa 45/60 Vapor pressure, winter, min./max. 2 kPa 60/90 Evaporated volume at 70 degC, summer, min./max. %         75/Final boiling point, max.
degC        210 VLI 3 transitional period 4, max. 2 1 164 1 150 1 Applicable to Super Plus: RON/MON, min. 98/88; ethanol content, max. 10.0 % . 2 National values for Germany.  3 VLI Vapor lock index.  4 Spring and fall.
which can be produced from methanol or : ethanol MTBE ethanol. When ether is added, the maximum permitted volume percentage of ethanol must be reduced accordingly. Worldwide many countries have defined minimum quotas for biogenic components in gasolines, which are achieved for the most part with bioethanol.
Adding alcohols increases the volatility at higher temperatures. Furthermore, alcohols can damage materials in the fuel system, lead for example to elastomer swelling, and trigger alcoholate corrosion on aluminum parts. Depending on the alcohol content and the temperature, demixing may result in response to only small amounts of water. During phase separation a new aqueous phase is formed with part of the alcohol from the fuel. The use of fuels containing alcohol therefore require additional measures on the vehicle and in the filling station network.
The ethers do not encounter the problem of demixing. The ethers, which have a lower vapor pressure, a higher calorific value and a higher octane number than ethanol, are chemically stable components with good material compatibility. They therefore demonstrate advantages, both from an engine engineering and a logistical standpoint. For reasons of sustainability, because of the CO2 savings to be attained and due to the laying down of quotas for biogenic fuels, ETBE is used in the main.
The ethanol content in the European gasoline standard EN 228 was for a long time limited to 5 % , for which a vapor pressure higher by approximately 7 kPa is permitted according to the American standard ASTM D4814. If certain preconditions are satisfied, a vapor pressure that is up to 8 kPA higher is also according to EN 228, depending on the ethanol content.
In the USA the amount of ethanol that may be added to gasoline is limited by law to 10 % . The vapor pressure increase of 7 kPa, which until now has been confined to E10, will also apply in future to E15.
Characteristics Density Density European standard EN 228 fixes the density of gasolines at 720 775 kg/m3. Octane number Octane number The octane number defines the gasoline's antiknock quality , which is extremely knock resistant, is assigned the octane number 100, while n heptane, which is extremely knock susceptible, is assigned the number 0.
The mixture of iso octane and n heptane, which exhibits the same knock resistance as the fuel to be tested, is determined in a standardized test engine. The proportion in % by volume of iso octane in the mixture of iso octane and n heptane corresponds to the fuel's octane number.
Research and motor octane numbers RON . The MON basically provides an indication of the tendency to knock at high speeds.
The Motor Method differs from the Research Method by using preheated mixtures, higher engine speeds and variable ignition timing. This places more stringent thermal demands on the fuel under examination. MON figures are lower than those for RON.
Increasing the antiknock quality Normal is it possible to produce fuels with high octane numbers which are suitable for modern, high compression engines. Even components containing oxygen such as alcohols and ether increase the antiknock quality. They are therefore specifically added for this purpose.
Additives containing metal to increase the octane number, e.g., MMT , form ashes during combustion. The addition of MMT is therefore excluded in EN 228 by the fixing of a limit value for manganese in the trace range.
In view of the optimization of downsizing and turbocharging of direct injection gasoline engines there are increasingly indications that high characteristic RON and MON values alone cannot guarantee actual sufficient knock resistance of fuels in the lower torque range. The pre ignition behavior can also vary greatly for a similar RON such that an additional characteristic, the compression pre ignition number , is suggested to characterize the tendency to pre ignition .
Fuel volatility The volatility of gasoline has both upper and lower limits. The lower limitation is chosen so that the fuel contains sufficiently volatile components to ensure a reliable cold start. However, the fuel's volatility may not be so high that at higher temperatures the fuel supply is interrupted by the formation of gas bubbles  and as a result difficulties when hot starting or problems when driving are encountered. Yet another factor is environmental protection, which demands that evaporative losses be kept low.
Fuel volatility is defined by different characteristic quantities. EN 228 defines for E5 and E10 ten different volatility classes distinguished by various levels of boiling curve, vapor pressure and VLI . To meet special requirements stemming from variations in climatic conditions, European countries can incorporate specific individual classes into their own national appendices in the standard. Different values are laid down for summer and winter.
A similar provision is included in the American gasoline standard ASTM D4814. Comprehensive tables describe the scope of application of the volatility classes, depending on the calender month and state. Boiling curve Boiling curve In order to assess the fuel in vehicle operation, it is necessary to view the individual areas of the boiling curve separately. EN 228 therefore contains limit values laid down for the volume of fuel that vaporizes at 70 degC, at 100 degC and at 150 degC. Up to 70 degC an minimum volume of fuel must be vaporized in order to ensure easy starting of the engine when cold . Suf 
ficient volatility in the lower temperature : range is particularly important for vehicles in which the fuel preparation is still performed by means of a carburetor .
Vapor pressure Vapor pressure Fuel vapor pressure as measured at 37.8 degC in accordance with EN 13016 1 is primarily a characteristic quantity with which the safety requirements in the vehicle's tank are established. Vapor pressure has upper and lower limits in all specifications. In Germany, for example, it is max. 60 kPa in summer and max. 90 kPa in winter.
In order to configure a fuel injection system, it is also important to know the vapor pressure at higher temperatures .
If the fuel vapor pressure rises above the fuel injection system pressure, for example during vehicle operation due to the effect of the engine temperature, this may result in malfunctions caused by vapor bubble formation. Due to the increased volatility of alcohol fuels, especially for operation with M15, the validation range for system functions and vehicle applications must be checked and if necessary adapted.
SAO0011 2E 40 20 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 300 0 20 Super Summer fuel 40 B D E F C A 60 Evaporated volume Limits DIN EN 228 E5       Summer fuel       Winter fuel Super Winter fuel
Vapor/liquid ratio: Vapor/liquid ratio The vapor/liquid ratio is a measure of a fuel's tendency to form bubbles. It refers to the volume of vapor generated by a specific quantity of fuel at a defined back pressure and a defined temperature. A drop in pressure , or an increase in temperature, will raise the vapor/liquid ratio and with it the possibility of operating problems. ASTM D4814 lays down, for example for each volatility class, a temperature at which a vapor/liquid ratio of 20 must not be exceeded.
Vapor lock index Vapor lock index The vapor lock index  and seven times the volume percentage of fuel that vaporizes at up to 70 degC. It is possible with this additional limit value to restrict the volatility of the fuel further with the result that the two maximum values for vapor pressure and boiling data cannot be achieved in the course of its production. Additives Additives can be added to improve fuel quality in order to counteract deteriorations in engine performance and in the exhaust gas composition during vehicle operation. The packages generally used combine individual components with various attributes.
Care and precision are required both when testing additives and in determining their optimal compositions and concentrations. Undesirable side effects must be avoided. Basic additives are added at the refinery to protect the plants and to ensure a minimum fuel quality. To further improve quality, brand specific multifunction additives can be added at the refinery's filling stations when the road tankers are filled .
and methanol content E5 Gasoline without alcohol E10 E15 E20 Mixture Methanol fuels Ethanol fuels 37.8 degC E50 E24 E85 E100 M15 M85 M100 kPa 1,000 800 600 400 200 0 Vapor pressure 100 degC 130 degC SAO0012 1E
Detergents: Detergents The setting and preparation of the mixture composition of air and fuel in the combustion chamber is pivotal for trouble free driving and minimization of pollutants in the exhaust gas. Keeping the entire intake system  help to keep surfaces clean and remove existing coatings.
Corrosion inhibitors Corrosion inhibitors The ingress of water/moisture may lead to corrosion in fuel system components. Corrosion can be effectively eliminated by the addition of corrosion inhibitors, which form a thin protective film on the metal surface.
Aging stabilizers Aging stabilizers Oxidation inhibitors are added to fuels to improve their stability during storage. They prevent rapid oxidation caused by oxygen in the air.
Blend components for fossil gasolines Bioethanol Bioethanol Production from sugar and starch Bioethanol can be obtained from products containing sugar and starch and is the most widely produced biofuel worldwide. Plants containing sugar are fermented with yeast, the sugar fermenting to form ethanol in the process.
When bioethanol is obtained from starch grains such as corn, wheat or rye are pretreated with enzymes in order to partially split the long chain starch molecules. A split into dextrose molecules occurs during the subsequent likewise enzymatically performed saccharification. Bioethanol is created in a further process step by means of fermentation with yeast. Production of lignocellulose Enzymes can also be used to produce bioethanol from lignocellulose. Lignocellulose forms the structural framework of the plant cell wall and contains the chief constituents lignin, hemicellulose and cellulose. The advantage of this process is that the entire plant can be used and not just that part containing sugar or starch. Because of this new approach, this product is also referred to as 2nd generation bioethanol. However, the enzymes can split cellulose, but not lignin. The enzymes developed to date are still highly sensitive with regard to the usable biomass such that this process is slow in acquiring economic significance.
Use of bioethanol Bioethanol is, on the basis of its properties, highly suitable for admixing in gasolines, particularly in order to increase the octane number of pure gasoline. That is why virtually all gasoline standards permit the addition of ethanol as a blend component. Even the biofuel policy of the European Union leads one to expect that the market penetration and the proportion of bioethanol in gasolines will continue to rise if it is guaranteed that bioethanol is created on a sustained basis and not in competition with foods.
Bioethanol can also be used as a pure fuel in gasoline engines in flexible fuel vehicles ethanol is offered in some European countries, for example Germany, France, and Sweden.
On account of the cold start problems at low temperatures, the maximum ethanol concentration is sometimes reduced depending on the local climate. Fuel samples exhibit typical ethanol contents of 75 to 85 % water.
Methanol: Methanol Manufacture Methanol is primarily produced not by regenerative means from fossil energy sources such as coal and natural gas, and therefore makes no contribution to reducing CO2 emissions. Nevertheless, China for strategic reasons relies on methanol fuels because they enable part of its high fuel demand to be covered locally from coal. Here, M 15 appears to represent an upper limit for use in conventional gasoline engines. In China, an M85 analogous to E85 is additionally being discussed for flexible fuel vehicles.
Use of methanol With the same alcohol content, methanol fuels have a significantly greater corrosive effect on ferrous alloys than ethanol fuels. Even demixing occurs much more quickly when the fuel is fouled by water. Because of the negative experiences of methanol fuels in Germany during the oil crisis in 1973 and also due to its toxicity, the use of methanol as a blend component has again been abandoned in Germany. From a worldwide point of view, only occasional methanol admixtures are being conducted at present, and then for the most part apart from China with a content of well below 5 % .
Diesel fuel Diesel fuel grades As well as petroleum based conventional diesel fuel, purely paraffinic fuels, particularly from renewable sources, and biodiesel have also become important.
the premium qualities additionally sold at some filling stations satisfy this standard. Standard and premium diesel fuels differ in the basic quality, in the addition of paraffinic fuel components, and in the additives.
Up to 7 % can be admixed with diesel fuel in accordance with EN 590, where the quality of the biodiesel is stipulated by standard EN 14214 .
Characteristics Cetane number Cetane number The cetane number , which ignites very easily, while slow igniting a methyl naphthalene
is allocated cetane number 0. The cetane : number of a diesel fuel is determined in a standardized CFR single cylinder test engine with a variable compressor piston . The compression ratio of the fuel to be tested is measured at constant ignition lag. Reference fuels composed of cetane and heptamethylnonane, a component with the cetane number 15, are operated with the determined compression ratio. The proportion of cetane in the mixture is altered until the same ignition lag is obtained. The cetane proportion in percent specifies the cetane number.
The expenditure of an engine test to determine the cetane number can be avoided by determining in a constant volume combustion chamber the ignition lag, i.e., the time interval between the start of injection and compression ignition. The derived cetane number .
Cetane numbers over 50 are desirable for optimum operation of modern engines, particularly under cold starting conditions. High quality diesel fuels contain a high proportion of paraffins with high cetane numbers. Aromatic compounds exhibit only a low ignition quality.
Cetane index Cetane index Yet another parameter of ignition quality is provided by the cetane index, which is calculated on the basis of fuel density and various points on the boiling curve. This purely mathematical parameter does not take into account the influence of cetane improvers on ignition quality. In order to limit the adjustment of the cetane number by means of cetane improvers, both the cetane number and the cetane index have been included in the list of requirements in the standard EN 590.
Flash point degC > 55 1 Filterability limit. 2 Determined nationally, for Germany 0 to 20 degC. 3 Sum total of insoluble substances after aging.
If, however, the end of boiling is at the high : end of the temperature scale, this can result in higher soot emissions and nozzle coking. This refers to the formation of deposits as a result of the chemical decomposition of non volatile fuel components in the spray hole and on the nozzle cone and the addition of combustion residues. The processes of carbon depositing are highly complex. Above all non volatile fuel components from the refinery cracking processes contribute to coking.
The degree of coking, which is calculated from the measured hydraulic throughflow of the uncleaned and the cleaned nozzle, is for a specified nozzle geometry a measure of the tendency of a fuel to form deposits in the injection nozzles. Conversely, it is possible to assess with a reference fuel how the design of different nozzle configurations influences the formation of carbon deposits.
When the end of boiling is higher, the ingress of fuel over the cylinder walls into the engine oil is greater. For this reason, the percentage of non volatile fuel components should not be too high.
of diesel fuels B0, B5...B100 Admixtures of biodiesel, RME Rapeseed methyl ester, HVO Hydro treated vegetable oil, GtL Gas to Liquid, COD Conversion of Olefins to Distillates. SAO0013 4E Sweden diesel HVO GtL COD 0 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 20 40 60 Collected volume Limit values in EN 590
SS 155435. In the boiling curve of paraf : finic fuel created by the hydrogenation of vegetable oils the relatively uniform composition in the middle boiling range becomes clear because the paraffins contained in the HVO have come from a narrowly limited fatty acid spectrum.
Filterability Filterability limit limit Precipitation of paraffin crystals at low temperatures can result in fuel filter blockage, ultimately leading to an interruption of the fuel flow. In worst case scenarios, paraffin particulates can start to form already at temperatures of 0 degC or even higher. The cold resistance of a fuel is assessed by means of the temperature at which the fuel filter becomes clogged under defined test conditions . Standard EN 590 defines different limit values for the CFPP in various classes, and can be defined by individual member states depending on the prevailing geographical and climatic conditions. Formerly, owners sometimes added regular gasoline to their vehicle fuel tanks to improve the cold response of diesel fuel. This practice is no longer necessary now that fuels conform to standards, and this may in any case cause damage particularly in today's widely used systems with high pressure fuel injection.
Flash point Flash point The flash point is defined as the temperature at which the quantities of vapor which a combustible fluid emits to the atmosphere are sufficient to allow a spark to ignite the air/vapor mixture above the fluid. For safety reasons , diesel fuel must comply with Hazard Class A III, i.e., its flash point must be above 55 degC. Less than 3 % gasoline in the diesel fuel is sufficient to lower the flash point to such an extent that ignition becomes possible at room temperature.
Density Density The energy content per unit of volume increases in the case of purely fossil diesel fuel produced only from crude oil with density. Assuming constant activation of the injectors due to fluctuations in calorific value. When an engine runs on fuel that has a high type dependent density, engine performance and soot emissions increase; at low fuel density, these parameters drop. For this reason, the type dependent density spread for diesel fuel is tightly limited.
When biodiesel is admixed with diesel fuel, the density of the mixture increases due to the higher density of biodiesel, but the energy content decreases due to the amount of oxygen contained.
Viscosity Viscosity Viscosity is a measure of a fuel's resistance to flow due to internal friction. Excessively low viscosity of the diesel fuel leads to increased return quantities in the injector, as a result of which the fuel injection system is additionally heated up and in some cases the injected fuel quantity required for full load is no longer achieved. In addition, the risk of wear and cavitation erosion increases.
Much higher viscosity for instance when pure biodiesel  compared with petroleum diesel. The fuel injection system may not therefore be applied with petroleum diesel to the permissible peak pressure. High viscosity also changes the spray pattern due to the formation of larger droplets. The droplet distribution in the combustion chamber is called the spray pattern. Since the fuel viscosity increases sharply in cold conditions, restrictions in fuel delivery may be experienced as a result of the reduction of the volumetric flow.
Lubricity: Lubricity The hydrodynamic lubricity of diesel fuels is not as important as the lubricity in the mixed friction range. The introduction of environment compatible, hydrogenation desulfurized fuels resulted in huge wear problems with distributor injection pumps in the field. Desulfurization also sees the removal of fuel components which are important to lubricity. Lubricity enhancers have to be added to many fuels to avoid these problems. The standard EN 590 prescribes a minimum lubricity, measured as wear of max. 460 um in an oscillation wear test .
Oxidation stability Oxidation stability The constituents of diesel fuels are subject to a more pronounced extent than gasoline to oxidation caused by oxygen in the air. This is the case particularly when biodiesel is admixed. Polymers and acids are produced during oxidation, which is also referred to as fuel aging. Aging polymers can directly give rise to the formation of coatings and to gumming in the fuel injection system. Aging acids frequently react with metal ions to produce organic salts and soaps , which are insoluble in diesel fuel and therefore also form coatings.
It is important that the fuel, while it is in the vehicle, has a sufficient aging reserve. The aging reserve is measured as induction time under the test conditions defined in EN 15751 at 110 degC. When diesel fuel at the filling station pump exhibits an aging reserve of at least 20 hours according to this test standard, it is ensured that the fuel is stable enough for normal use. In the past, failures caused by fuel aging have only occurred in isolated cases when vehicles were subject to very long idle periods, in special agricultural applications, or also in the construction sector. Total contamination Total contamination Total contamination refers to the sum total of undissolved foreign particulates in the fuel, such as sand, rust, and insoluble organic components, including aging polymers of the fuel. The standard EN 590 permits a maximum total contamination of 24 mg/kg. Very hard silicates which occur in mineral dust are specially damaging to high pressure fuel injection systems with narrow gap widths. Even a fraction of the permissible overall contamination level if the particulates were abrasive would cause erosive and abrasive wear.
Since 2014 there have in many regions of Europe been a large number of reports of damage to fuel injection systems caused by abrasive particulates . Wear of this nature results in valve leakage, which lowers fuel injection pressure and engine performance, and increases particulate emissions. Typical European diesel fuels contain about 2,500 particulates per 1 ml. Particulate sizes around 4 mm are particularly critical. High performance fuel filters with high filtration efficiency are therefore necessary to prevent damage caused by particulates.
Water in diesel fuel Water in diesel fuel Up to approximately 100 mg/kg water dissolve in diesel fuel at room temperature. The solubility limit depends on the composition of the diesel fuel, particularly the aromatic compound content, the additives, the proportion of biodiesel, and the ambient temperature. The standard EN 590 permits a maximum water content of 200 mg/kg. Although diesel fuels in storage tanks can contain much higher amounts of water, market surveys of fuels show that water content rarely exceeds 200 mg/kg. Samples often do not detect any water, or detection is incomplete, since water is deposited on walls in a separate phase in the form of undissolved, "free" water, or it settles at the bottom. Whereas dissolved water does not damage the fuel injection system, even very small quantities of free water can cause wear or corrosion damage to fuel injection components within a short period of time.
Additives: Additives, long a standard feature in gasolines, have attained increasing significance as quality improvers in diesel fuels. Additive packages, which are effective in a number of respects, are used for the most part. As the total concentration of the additives generally lies below 0.1 %, the fuel's physical characteristics such as density, viscosity, and boiling curve remain unchanged.
Lubricity enhancers Lubricity enhancers It is possible to improve the lubricity of diesel fuels with poor lubrication properties, caused, for example, by hydrogenation processes during desulfurization, by adding fatty acids or glycerides. Glycerides are partially cracked vegetable oils. Even biodiesel contains proportions of glycerides. In this case, if diesel fuel already contains biodiesel, no further lubricity enhancers are added.
Cetane improvers Cetane improvers Nitric acid esters of alcohols, which shorten the duration until ignition and extreme smoking.
Flow improvers Flow improvers Flow improvers consist of polymer substances that lower the filterability temperature limit. They are generally added in winter to ensure trouble free operation at low temperatures. Although flow improvers cannot prevent the precipitation of paraffin crystals from diesel fuel, it can severely limit their growth. The crystals produced are then so small that they do not clog the filter pores completely and allow the passage of fuel until they melt again as the engine heat begins to build up. Detergents Detergents Detergents are cleaning additives which are added to the fuel to keep nozzle holes free from deposits on the inside and at the outlet. The cleaning effect of detergents is based on their molecular structure of groups of different polarity: Long nonpolar hydrocarbon chains ensure good solubility in the fuel while coordination to the for the most part also polar coatings is facilitated by way of polar groups. Detergents function in this way as carriers with which existing deposits can be removed via the fuel. Furthermore, these additives can also prevent the build up of new deposits by coordination of the polar groups to metal surfaces.
Corrosion inhibitors Corrosion inhibitors Typical corrosion inhibitors are longer chain organic monomeric and dimeric acids, amines or ammonium salts. These compounds are deposited with their polar end on the surfaces of metal parts and protect them against corrosion if water is entrained.
Antifoaming agents Adding defoamers helps to avoid excessive foaming when the vehicle is refueled quickly. Antifoaming agents such as silicones reduce the surface tension, causing bubbles that are created to burst rapidly.
Blend components for fossil : diesel fuels Biodiesel Biodiesel At present, biodiesel is the most important alternative fuel for diesel engines. The term biodiesel covers fatty acid esters which are created through transesterification of oils or greases with methanol. This creates fatty acid methyl esters . Fatty acid methyl esters are in their molecule size and thus also in their physical chemical properties much more similar to diesel fuel than vegetable oils. Biodiesel and vegetable oils are therefore not the same. Nevertheless, biodiesel differs significantly from petroleum diesel, since the fatty acid esters are polar and chemically reactive. Conventional diesel fuel on the other hand is a nonpolar mixture of paraffins and aromatic compounds and therefore less active.
Manufacture Vegetable oils or animal fats can be used as the starting material for biodiesel. In Europe primarily rape oil is used, in North and South America soybean oil, in Asia palm oil, and on the Indian subcontinent to an even smaller extent the oil from the purgier nut are produced worldwide. Because of the global trade in biodiesel and its raw materials, fuels containing FAME as a rule contain mixtures from different sources.
Properties The properties of biodiesel are determined by various factors. The various vegetable oils differ in the composition of the fatty acid blocks and demonstrate typical fatty acid patterns. The type and quantity of unsaturated fatty acids have, for example, a decisive influence on the cold resistance and resistance to aging of biodiesel. The properties are also affected by the pretreatment of the vegetable oils and the production process of the biodiesel.
The American biodiesel standard ASTM D6751 is less quality oriented. For example, the minimum requirement for oxidation stability in this standard is less than half the aging reserve  specified in EN 14214. Thus, in the USA the risk of problems arising as a result of fuel aging, in particular under limit value application and field conditions, is higher. Other countries such as Brazil, India and Korea have geared themselves, to a large extent, towards the European B100 standard EN 14214.
Use in vehicles Since the tax benefit was discontinued biodiesel has barely been used as a pure fuel in Germany. The introduction of diesel particulate filters and stringent requirements regarding the limitation of vehicle emissions under field conditions even over high mileages limit the use of B100 to a few special applications. Originally B100 was used predominantly in commercial vehicles, because the annual high mileage ensured fast consumption, which enabled problems with insufficient oxidation stability to be avoided.
From an engine engineering viewpoint, it is more favorable to use biodiesel as a low percentage mixture with petroleum diesel. The high proportion of petroleum diesel ensures sufficient stability and, at the same time, the biodiesel ensures an improved lubricating effect.
For practical purposes, it is important to specify not only the pure component B100, but also the diesel/biodiesel mixtures offered on the market. Here, the trend is towards admixtures up to max. 7 % biodiesel .
In closed fleets, higher proportions of biodiesel are also used . In the case of higher contents, the high boiling point of biodiesel can cause it to be heavily introduced into the engine oil after its has been injected into the combustion chamber via condensation on the cylinder walls. This affects, above all, vehicles which are fitted with diesel particulate filters, and in which filter regeneration occurs by way of a retarded secondary injection. Depending on the application, it is possible, particularly in slow part load operation, to encounter an unacceptably high introduction of biodiesel, which necessitates shorter oil replacement intervals. The higher boiling point of biodiesel can be taken into account by application in new developments of engines and vehicles.
An additional standard has been developed in Europe for B20/B30, EN 16709 , in which merely an induction time of at least 6 hours was laid down for biodiesel contents of 6 to 20 %.
The standard EN 16734 has also been adopted in Europe; this standard covers diesel fuels with biodiesel contents of 0 to 10 % and thus overlaps to a large extent with the standard EN 590 for standard diesel fuel . Still the market demand for this additional quality is low. Furthermore, this fuel is not permitted to be placed on the market in all European countries.
Vegetable oils Vegetable oils Vegetable oils which have not been transesterified into biodiesel may not be admixed with diesel fuels due to their high density, high viscosity, and low volatility. Previously, vegetable oils, particularly rapeseed oil, were used with great success in older diesel engines subject to minimal emission requirements. Only few
modern diesel engines with high pressure : fuel injection can be run on vegetable oils, for example in tractors which have been approved for such operation.
Paraffinic diesel fuels Paraffinic diesel fuels Further blend components for fossil diesel fuels are purely paraffinic fuels, which consist exclusively of saturated hydrocarbons. Since there are no aromatic components, the particulate, HC and CO emissions of purely paraffinic fuels are significantly reduced when compared with conventional fuels.
Distillates) Fischer Tropsch process The starting product required is synthesis gas, which consists of hydrogen . The Fischer Tropsch catalysts function quite non specifically such that a wealth of different components is obtained, starting with gases through short chain gasoline components, kerosene and diesel paraffins, right down to oils and waxes of high molecular weight. For reasons of economy, the production mixture is for the most part optimized to a maximum diesel yield. The frequently used designation synthetic diesel fuels makes clear that the hydrocarbons in the Fischer Tropsch process are made from the building blocks H2 and CO.
These fuels were originally also referred to as designer fuels, because the notion existed that the composition of synthetic diesel fuel could be geared exactly to the demands of diesel engine technology. In view of the wide range of products obtained from Fischer Tropsch synthesis, the notion of producing fuels of customized composition does not appear realistic.
For the designation of this type of synthetic fuels it is common practice to use the terms derived from the conversion process Gas to Liquid , depending on whether the paraffins have been created from natural gas, coal or biomass.
The production of CtL and GtL is economically significant. The production of GtL is only worthwhile with large natural gas deposits where the natural gas cannot be attributed to any direct use. CtL and GtL are based on fossil energy sources such that no reduction in CO2 emissions is achieved. In the case of BtL, there is no CO2 advantage. However, industrial plants that produce BtL are not as yet in operation.
Biomass is utilized completely in the manufacture of BtL. The plants are first broken down into chemical building blocks from which fuels are then synthesized in a subsequent step. Fuels which are manufactured in this way are called second generation fuels. This procedure differs fundamentally from the hitherto customary methods, which are used for the production of first generation fuels and are based on the use of agricultural crops. Biodiesel can be created by transesterification and bioethanol by fermentation from the components contained therein such as fats, starches and sugars.
Hydrogenation of vegetable oils Paraffinic diesel fuels can also be obtained by hydrogenating fats and oils. The term hydro treated vegetable oil is often used for these products. Unlike transesterification into biodiesel, conversion with hydrogen places fewer demands on the origin and quality of the starting materials. Hydrogenation results in a cracking of fats and oils, during which all the oxygen atoms and unsaturated bonds are also removed. Long chain paraffins are obtained from the fatty acids, the glycerin content is converted into propane gas, and the oxygen is bound as water. Because paraffins are created from biomass in this way, they are referred to as bioparaffins. The production of bioparaffins can be implemented in separate plants or even integrated into existing refinery processes.
COD process The third way of producing paraffins is to convert olefins in accordance with the COD process , frequently only as a subsequent step to previous refinery processes. Olefinic product fractions are used for this purpose. Paraffins can be produced by oligomerization, a specifically controlled reaction between individual olefins, and hydrogenation.
Reprocessing All three manufacturing processes described here are followed by an additional isomerization step in which linear molecules are converted into branched molecules. This is the only way to achieve the required cold resistance.
Use in vehicles Paraffinic fuel in accordance with EN 15940 can be used in vehicles which have been approved for this fuel. Pure paraffinic fuels are used mostly in older vehicles with no diesel particulate filters and lend themselves to use above all in centers of population in order to reduce the particulate load on a local level. To reduce the CO2 emissions of vehicle fleets, HVO has recently been increasingly used in the haulage industry.
Paraffinic hydrocarbons are ideal for marketing as blend components in premium diesel fuels. Furthermore, diesel fuels which fail to satisfy the requirements established in EN 590 can be improved by the addition of paraffinic components to such an extent that they conform to the standard.
Natural gas Composition Composition Natural gas is fossil in nature. Natural gas is promoted worldwide and can be prepared with relatively little effort. The main constituent of natural gas is methane . Further constituents are inert gases, such as carbon dioxide, nitrogen and short chain hydrocarbons. Oxygen and hydrogen are also contained. Depending on its origin, however, its composition varies, which results in fluctuations when it comes to density, calorific value and knock resistance. The way in which natural gas is transported also impacts on its composition.
Unlike when it is transported as gas through pipelines, natural gas that is distributed by ships in liquid form as LNG  contains hardly any CO2, pentane, hexane, and hydrogen sulfide. The properties of natural gas as a fuel are set out in the European standard EN 16723 2 , in which standardized quality requirements with regard to natural gas, to pure biomethane and to blends of natural gas and biomethane are defined.
92  79  73  65  71  92 103  77  80  86  90 102
percentage of methane in a methane/hy : drogen mixture which exhibits in a test engine under standard conditions the same knock characteristics as the gaseous fuel to be tested. Pure methane is assigned the methane number 100, hydrogen the methane number 0. As with the definition of the octane number for gasolines, the following applies to gases and gas mixtures: the lower the methane number, the lower the knock resistance.
Wobbe index Wobbe index The upper Wobbe index Ws specifies the gross calorific value Hs on a volumetric basis. For many applications it is important to know the energy content of the volumetric flow. Only with reference to the Wobbe index can the flow of gas be set to the desired amount of energy and the gas quality easily corrected in the event of changes. A consideration of the calorific value alone is not enough. The upper Wobbe index Ws is obtained by dividing the calorific value Hs by the square root of the relative density of the combustion gas. The relative density of the combustion gas is the quotient of the density of the combustion gas and the density of dry air, both determined under the same reference conditions . If, however, all that matters is the mechanically utilizable energy content in the volumetric flow, reference is made to the lower Wobbe index Wi, i.e., the net calorific value Hi on a volumetric basis. Biomethane Biomethane is treated biogas which is made from biogenic materials such as energy crops, liquid manure or waste containing biomass. The CO2 savings from the use of biogenic basic material can be set off against the CO2 emissions during combustion in such a way that the total CO2 emissions for biomethane are clearly reduced compared with fossil natural gas. Production volumes of biomethane which exceed the local demand are frequently fed into the natural gas network. In summer, when the demand for natural gas is too low for heating purposes, natural gas can contain significant amounts of biomethane.
A lot of CO2 is produced in biogas plants as well as methane. Processes at plant scale in which CO2 can be biologically converted by highly specialized microorganisms into methane are well advanced and are already being introduced occasionally.
Synthetic methane In initial plants methane is also obtained from electricity whereby hydrogen is generated by electrolysis from water. The conversion of H2 with CO2 to CH4 is then performed chemically in the presence of catalysts in accordance with the Sabatier process.
Storage of natural gas Natural gas is stored either in gas form  at 162 degC in a cold resistant tank. LNG requires only one third of the storage volume of CNG, however the storage of LNG requires a high expenditure of energy for liquefying. Filling stations dispense natural gas almost exclusively in the form of CNG. LNG is as a rule only offered if the filling station can already be supplied with LNG.
CO2 emissions The hydrogen/carbon ratio of natural gas is roughly 4:1, that of gasoline on the other hand is 2,3:1. As a result of the lower amount of carbon in natural gas, it produces less CO2 and more H2O than gasoline when it is burned. A gasoline engine converted to natural gas creates, for a comparable power output without any further optimization, approximately 25 % fewer CO2 emissions than when run on gasoline. However, if a small methane slip remains during combustion, the additional methane emissions must be taken into account in the climate damaging potential footprint since direct methane emissions have a 20 times greater impact than CO2. Even escaping gaseous methane is relevant to the carbon footprint when for example an overpressure builds up in the LNG storage tanks and this is discharged to the atmosphere.
Use in vehicles: Natural gas is currently used primarily in passenger cars with gasoline engines which are of bivalent design, i.e., can be run separately on natural gas and gasoline. For buses and trucks there are gasoline gas engines which are of monovalent design for natural gas . Whether the market for natural gas vehicles will gain in importance depends primarily on the purchase and running costs for the vehicle owner, but also on the expansion of the filling station infrastructure to CNG and LNG.
Liquefied petroleum gas Liquefied petroleum gas , also called liquid gas, is obtained during the extraction of crude oil and during different refinery processes. LPG is a mixture of the main components of propane and butane. It can be liquefied at room temperature under comparatively low pressure. Because it has a lower carbon content than gasoline, approximately 10 % less CO2 is produced during combustion. The octane number is approximately 100 110 RON. The demands placed on LPG for use in motor vehicles are laid down in the European standard EN 589 .
Passenger cars for liquefied petroleum gas are also for the most part bivalent and can therefore be run separately on gasoline and liquefied petroleum gas. However, liquefied petroleum gas can cause significant wear on the intake valves if valve or seat insert materials have not been adapted to running on LPG.
Hydrogen: Manufacture Hydrogen can be produced from fossil or renewable sources. The classic production methods from fossil raw materials such as steam reforming of natural gas, gasification of coal in the presence of water or partial oxidation of mineral oil result in the release of considerable amounts of CO2. Although no CO2 emissions are produced locally during the engine combustion of hydrogen, the use of hydrogen of a fossil nature does not inevitably lead to a CO2 advantage in direct comparison with natural gas, gasoline or diesel fuel. Hydrogen can be regeneratively manufactured both by pyrolysis of biomass and by electrolysis or solar thermal processes directly from water. CO2 savings are obtained as a result of the production process and the overall expenditure of energy and are greater the more regeneratively produced energy is used in the process.
Because hydrogen today is primarily obtained industrially from natural gas, processes are also being developed with the aim of capturing the CO2 created and injecting it into repositories .
Storage Hydrogen may have a very high mass related energy density in order to achieve an acceptable tank volume.
Another possibility is for the hydrogen to be stored as a hybrid. Certain metals and alloys form, with hydrogen, metal hydrides. The hydrogen that is embedded in the metal's atomic lattice can be released again by heating.
e fuels can be constituted from e H2 in secondary reactions. Methane, e cH4, can be created by converting e H2 with CO2. Gaseous e fuels are called Power to Gas . It goes without saying that the CO2 used must also be of a regenerative nature. Regenerative CO2 can derive for example from biomass or be obtained from the ambient air. Due to the higher concentration of CO2 industrial waste gases, for example from steel or cement works, suggest themselves as sources, but this CO2 is not regeneratively produced.
To obtain in particular liquid e fuels, accordingly named Power to Liquid , synthesis gas, a mixture of e H2 and carbon monoxide, is required. Carbon monoxide is available from CO2 by a reversal of the water gas shift reaction.
Starting out from synthesis gas, two basic reaction paths are possible. On the one hand, linear chains of hydrocarbons can be built up by means of Fischer Tropsch synthesis. They are, depending on the chain length, typical constituents of gasoline, kerosene or diesel fuel.
Alternatively, e methanol can also be produced from synthesis gas. Because limits are imposed on the direct use of methanol in gasoline engines, its further conversion to MTBE and is possible both as a H2 store and as a fuel.
Use in vehicles All e fuels which do not differ from the corresponding fossil or biogenous components or are very similar qualitatively to these are called drop in fuels. e H2, e CH4, e MTBE, MtG and Fischer Tropsch gasoline and Fischer Tropsch diesel fuel can either be used directly at 100 % in the overall vehicle population or else at least replace the conventional components in large if not equal proportions. This substitution potential, which would entail additional saving of significant quantities of CO2 in the traffic sector, can from a technical standpoint be used directly and depends on the availability of e fuels. Other e fuels such as e DME or e OME are, on account of their properties, not compatible with the vehicles in the on the road vehicle population. A new development of engines or at least their comprehensive adaptation is required to accommodate these fuels. The particulate emissions of these fuels are greatly reduced. In part, there can be technical advantages in the design of exhaust gas treatment. Because of the necessary changes, however, these types of e fuel are expected to find use in special applications and less so in the larger scale vehicle population.
Prospects for e fuels Although the production of e fuels requires an additional energy expenditure which is above its own energy content and the costs of their production, depending on the number of synthesis steps, far exceed the costs of the fossil components, e fuels will be afforded opportunities in the future. Without e fuels, for which a significant reduction of the production costs is forecast, the long term CO2 targets in the traffic sector cannot be achieved. Militating for the use of e fuels is furthermore the fact that purely battery electric drives can only gradually replace the internal combustion engine in heavy goods vehicle traffic and long distance transportation in the foreseeable future. For ships and in particular for aviation it is up to now
difficult to imagine that there could be a : technical alternative to the replacement of fossil fuels with biofuels and e fuels. Research projects have hitherto failed to bring onto the market considerable quantities of e fuels for the transport sector. Because the construction of largescale plants for the production of e fuels requires long lead times for planning, financing, design, and upscaling it is hardly expected by 2030 that significant proportions of fossil fuels can be replaced with e fuels. All the more important then are short term political moves that create a solid framework for investors so that e fuels can make a contribution to meeting the CO2 targets in traffic applications.
Results of research work into e fuels and scenarios regarding their introduction are the subject of numerous publications. In the meantime, handbooks provide a good overview of this subject area . Ethers Dimethyl ether Dimethyl ether .
Although DME from a combustion perspective is an ideal fuel for diesel engines, in reality only a few specially adapted vehicles use this fuel. DME liquefied under pressure is, due to its high vapor pressure and its low viscosity, not compatible with the existing injection components and engine designs developed for conventional diesel fuels.
The use of DME will, due to the necessary additional technical outlay on the vehicle, remain limited to just a few fleet vehicles in niche markets. Nevertheless, the possibility of using DME has been the subject of discussion again of late in connection with e fuels. The manufacture of DME is performed by means of synthesis gas is currently based mainly on carbon or natural gas, supplemented to a small extent by biomass or waste materials. If in future synthesis gas can be produced in larger quantities from hydrogen from electrolysis e H2 and regenerative CO2, this could drive forward the use of DME in engine applications.
ethers with n = 3 to 5 are being : discussed as possible future fuels. OME too is an e fuel when the synthesis gas from which OME is produced under other reaction conditions like DME consists of hydrogen from electrolysis and regenerative CO2.
OME1 OME1 OME1 is technically easily available from synthesis gas. This oxymethylene ether, which is chemically more accurately called dimethoxymethane, is however not suitable either as a pure substance or as a blend component for existing diesel engines, although OME1 unlike DME is still liquid at room temperature.
With a low boiling point of 42 degC, low viscosity of 0.33 mm2/s is currently being developed in which the questions that are still open for example regarding thermo oxidative stability, cold resistance, water content or limiting the content of OME2 and OME6 are addressed. Even a limit value for the total formaldehyde content must be introduced.
Unlike OME1, it is difficult to synthesize the higher oxymethylene ethers OME3 5. The equilibrium of starting materials, intermediates and end products arising from the reaction has a bearing on the chain length. During conversion the amount of formaldehyde that is formed must be controlled precisely, the water created removed, and released hydrogen recovered. For sustainability reasons the distillation outlay must also be kept as low as possible. The synthesis of OME3 5 is the subject of numerous research projects .
235 15.7 14.8 15.5 14.8  9.0 1.9  2  1.5  1.7  3.4 9.5 11  8.5  9 18.6 1 Density of liquefied gas 0.54 kg/l, density of liquid propane 0.51 kg/l, density of liquid butane 0.58 kg/l. 2 First value for isobutane, second value for n butane and n butene. 3 Density of liquefied dimethyl ether 0.667 kg/l.
 DIN EN ISO 3405:2019, Petroleum and related products form natural or synthetic sources Determination of distillation characteristics at atmospheric pressure .
 DIN EN 13016 1:2018, Liquid petroleum products Vapour pressure Part 1: Determination of air saturated vapour pressure .
 DIN EN 14214:2019, Liquid petroleum products Fatty acid methyl esters  for use in diesel engines and heating applications Requirements and test methods.
 DIN EN ISO 5165:2018, Petroleum products Determination of the ignition quality of diesel fuels Cetane engine method .
 DIN EN 15195:2015, Liquid petroleum products Determination of ignition delay and derived cetane number  of middle distillate fuels by combustion in a constant volume chamber.
 DIN EN 16144:2012, Liquid petroleum products Determination of ignition delay and derived cetane number  of middle distillate fuels Fixed range injection period, constant volume combustion chamber method.
 DIN EN 16715:2015, Liquid petroleum products Determination of ignition delay and derived cetane number  of middle distillate fuels Ignition delay and combustion delay determination using a constant volume combustion chamber with direct fuel injection.
 DIN EN 17155:2018 09, Liquid petroleum products Determination of indicated cetane number of middle distillate fuels Primary reference fuels calibration method using a constant volume combustion chamber.
 DIN EN 15751:2014, Automotive fuels Fatty acid methyl ester fuel and blends with diesel fuel Determination of oxidation stability by accelerated oxidation method.
 ASTM D7467 20, Standard Specification for Diesel Fuel Oil, Biodiesel Blend .
 DIN EN 16723 2:2017, Natural gas and biomethane for use in transport and biomethane for injection in the natural gas network Part 2: Automotive fuels specification.
 J. Forster: Diesel Gasmotoren. In: K. Mollenhauer, H. Tschoke, R. Maier : Handbuch Dieselmotoren, 4th Ed., pp. 219 224, Verlag Springer Vieweg, 2018.
 J. Forster: Direkteinblasung bei Dieselmotoren. In: K. Mollenhauer, H. Tschoke, R. Maier : Handbuch Dieselmotoren, 4th Ed., pp. 241 247, Verlag Springer Vieweg, 2018.
 M. Hartl, K. Gaukel, D. Pelerin et al.: Oxymethylenether als potenziell CO2 neutraler Kraftstoff fur saubere Dieselmotoren Teil 1: Motorenuntersuchungen, MTZ 78, 52 59 .
 D. Pelerin, M. Hartl, E. Jacob, G. Wachtmeister: Potentials to simplify the engine system using the alternative diesel fuels oxymethylene ether OME1 and OME3 6 on a heavy duty engine, Fuel 259, 116231 .
 DIN/TS 51699, Fuels Polyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers Requirements and test methods.
Properties High temperatures and direct sunlight are to be avoided due to decomposition by heat. When AdBlue is heated above 25 degC, an ammonia solution is created as an aqueous solution or as an aerosol of ammonia as a hazard determining substance.
AdBlue attacks base metals. Copper, alloys containing copper and unalloyed and galvanized steels, aluminum and glass are not suitable for contact with a urea/water solution.
AdBlue has a strong tendency to crystallization. White crystals form when the water that it contains evaporates. The growth of crystals is encouraged by increased air moisture. AdBlue has high penetration ability and a strong dispersion capacity. Lines/pipes can be blocked by crystallization. Blockages can be dissolved by warm water. It is essential to look out for the growth of crystals along electrical wiring/leads. Electric contacts can be jumpered by the high conductivity. Leads containing copper are corroded.
The product is not classified as hazardous and does not have to be specially labeled. The substance is not irritant, but after repeated or prolonged skin contact can cause degreasing of the skin and dermatitis. Experience in practice has shown reddened skin after a few minutes in contact with the medium.
At ambient temperatures below 10 degC containers, lines and equipment must be fitted with cold insulation and heating. Frozen AdBlue incurs no damage and can therefore be reused once it has thawed. Storing AdBlue at temperatures below 0 degC is to be avoided due to the risk of freezing and the associated volumetric expansion. There is the danger of the container splitting. A leak may only become visible after thawing.
Delivery form Aqueous solution Appearance Clear and colorless Odor Odorless up to slight odor  of ammonia Solubility Mixable with water in any ratio, poorly soluble in aliphatic hydrocarbons Congealing point 11.5 degC Reaction Weakly alkaline Electric conductivity Liquid and crystals  good electric conductivity
The core component of the air conditioning : system in motor vehicles is as a rule a cold vapor compression refrigerating system  are approximated by a air compressor and a throttle element and the isotherms are approximated by evaporating and condensing refrigerant. Operating fluids for which the phase changes occur at tenable pressures are required especially for evaporation and condensation.
refrigerants R134a and R1234yf. The global warming potential is a measure of the relative contribution of a greenhouse gas to the greenhouse effect. The reference forms the CO2 with the global warming potential of one. The emission of 1 kg R134a would accordingly have a greenhouse effect comparable with the emission of 1300 kg CO2.
Development up to today Refrigerant R12 Initially, combustible substances . This substance accepted as non poisonous and non combustible was used in practically all passenger car air conditioning systems and was additionally available for a great many other applications.
In 1974 the chemists Molina and Rowland put forward the hypothesis that substances containing chlorine damage the ozone layer that protects us . Subsequent observations of the ozone hole over Antarctica bore out this hypothesis. The evaluation of precise measurements finally provided certainty. This resulted on 16 September 1987 in the signing of the Montreal Protocol, in which the resolution was passed to renounce chlorine chemistry.
R134a and R1234yf Property R134a R1234yf Boiling point 26 degC 29 degC Vapor pressure  at 25 degC 6.56 bar 6.64 bar Vapor pressure  at 80 degC 25.97 bar 24.38 bar Vapor density 32.4 kg/m3 37.6 kg/m3 GWP approx. 1300 approx. 4
Refrigerant R1234yf: At the moment the only new refrigerant available that is produced in sufficient quantities is R1234yf . Therefore all the components must be newly developed and dimensioned for these unusually high pressures. Since such new developments affect not only development, production and sales but also to a significant extent service, a comprehensive market launch on 1st January 2017 could not be achieved.
An additional risk also arises in CO2 systems. Because of the extremely high pressures a considerable amount of energy is stored in the system. This energy could for example in an accident be additionally released and cause further damage. Therefore enhanced safety precautions must also be taken for CO2 air conditioning systems. Alternative possibilities It is safe to assume that R1234yf will not be the last refrigerant used. One possibility is to build on the experiences with the CO2 air conditioning systems and expand this technology as a long term solution. If this does not prove successful, natural substances which are really neutral in their impact on the environment can be considered. There have already been studies in this connection at the time of the discussions regarding renunciation of chlorine chemistry when scientists were locking for substitute substances for refrigerants containing chlorine . The most natural substances would be water and air.
Water as refrigerant In principle, water could be used in a cold vapor compression refrigerating system, but evaporation and condensation would take place at extremely low pressures. In other words, the tiniest leaks would raise the pressure and the system function would no longer be guaranteed. The function has been verified in the laboratory. However, this would not be easily feasible at the current time.
Air as refrigerant Air could be used in systems which operate according to the Joule process. Such systems are installed in virtually all commercial aircraft. However, the design of systems with much smaller output figures i.e. for passenger car applications is more difficult and at the least entails diminished effectiveness. The process has been used with a certain degree of success for climate control in rail vehicles, for example in the ICE 1. The system output here is on a comparable scale to aircraft, but conventional R134a systems have a significantly better effectiveness.
At the moment the German Federal Environment Agency is supporting a research project in which systems with natural refrigerants are to be reassessed . Since the Joule process is a pure gas process, it is inferior to the Carnot process in terms of effectiveness. It is used economically in aircraft due to the fact that some positive supplementary effects
are utilized. The air conditioning system : here has the additional task of pressurizing the cabin. The system weighs less than half as much as a comparable cold vapor compression system and the drive can be effectively realized with compressed air from the engines.
Combustible substances  as alternative refrigerants Combustible substances could be further alternatives. In refrigerators R12 for example has been superseded by isobutane. In motor vehicles, however, the situation is a little more difficult in that as the result of a leak for example in the evaporator combustible substances would inevitably get into the passenger cell.
________________________________ References References : M. J. Molina; F. S. Rowland: Stratospheric sink for chlorofluoromethanes: chlorine atom catalysed destruction of ozone. Nature, No. 249 pp 810 812, June 28, 1974.
 Regulation No. 842/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on certain fluorinated greenhouse gases.
 Umweltbundesamt: Erprobung, Messung und Bewertung von Systemen mit naturlichen Kaltemitteln zum nachhaltigen Kuhlen und Heizen von offentlichen Verkehrsmitteln Ersatz fluorierter Treibhausgase. Duration 07 May 2015 31 March 2018.
Drivetrain elements: The drivetrain is in automotive engineering assigned all the components which generate power for drive purposes and transmit that power to the road. The conventional drivetrain of a motor vehicle includes the internal combustion engine, the transmission, the propeller shaft, the final drive differential, and the drive shafts. The transmission contains a vibration damper, a power take up element, and a step up gear unit with gear shift elements. Figure 1 shows the arrangement of these components for a standard drive . It also shows the components for an all wheel drive.
Components marked * are optionally provided for an all wheel drive. UMM0722 3E Drive shaft* Drive shaft Propshaft Transfer case* Gear shift elements Synchronization Multi disk clutches Power take up element Single clutch Dual clutch Hydrodynamic  torque converter Vibration absorption Torsion damper Dual mass flywheel Centrifugal pendulum type absorber Step up gear units Manually shifted transmission Automated manual transmission Dual clutch transmission Automatic planetary transmission Continuously variable transmission Final drive differential Propshaft*
Tractive force curves Requirements The requirements that a motor vehicle is to fulfill with regard to maximum climbing capability and acceleration on the one hand and top speed on the other hand define the necessary tractive force on the wheels and hence the demand on the transmission with regard to its spacing between the lowest and highest gears. The final drive differential assumes some of the stepping up duties so that the speed ratio in the step up gear unit does not get too big for the different gears. The overall ratio iA of the drivetrain is the product of the gear ratio in of the step up gear unit in the selected gear and the constant gear ratio iB of the final drive differential.
UMM0723 1E 0 100 150 200 250 50 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 N 0 1 3 2 5 4 km/h Driving speed u Tractive force FZ and running resistance FW
In Figure 2 it becomes clear that an internal combustion engine without a step up gear unit would only operate in a very limited driving range. Here the tractive force FZ of the engine only contains the transmission ratio of the differential so that the effect of torque conversion in the step up gear unit can be clearly explained in the following.
I...VI Tractive force curves for gears 1 through 6. UMM0724 2E 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 I II III IV V VI N 0 0 100 150 200 km/h 250 50 1 3 2 2 2 2 2 5 4 Driving speed u Tractive force FZ and running resistance FW
The tractive force curves for the individual gears increase in the range above idle speed with increasing engine torque and drop off in the high speed range in response to decreasing engine torque.
In the case of geometrical gear stepping the gear step is always the same. This is used in truck transmissions with high numbers of gears. A truck requires fine stepping in the entire driving range since its engine power is relatively low with regard to its high mass.
Progressive gear stepping is used in passenger car transmissions. This means that the gear step becomes increasingly smaller to the higher gears. Consequently, the non utilizable driving ranges .
Continuously variable transmission: Continuously variable transmission A continuously variable transmission .
Drive types The arrangement of the engine and the step up gear unit with vibration absorber and power take up element depends very much on the vehicle category.
installed so that there are few limitations on engine length and thus on engine power output. Until around 1930 this drive type was customary in virtually all vehicles; the designation standard drive dates back to that era. Since then, this drive type has featured almost exclusively in the upper mid size and luxury categories.
0 100 150 200 250 km/h 50 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 N 0 Driving speed u Tractive force FZ and running resistance FW 1 2 3 5 4 UMM0725 1E
Rear engine drive The engine, the step up gear unit and the final drive differential are situated in the area of the powered rear axle . Rear engines with rear wheel drive are in the meantime installed almost exclusively in sports vehicles.
Transaxle drive In the case of the transaxle drive, the engine is installed at the front and the step up gear unit and the final drive differential are mounted on the rear axle . The engine and the power take up element with step up gear unit are connected by a tube and together form a rigid drive unit. The tube contains the non articulated drive shaft, via which the transmission is driven. The drive shaft rotates with the engine speed.
The inverted transaxle drive is also possible with a mid engine; the step up gear unit and the final drive differential are mounted here on the front axle.
Underfloor engine drive An underfloor layout is possible in commercial vehicles. The engine is situated between the axles; in a truck it is arranged on the frame. Uniform axle load distribution results in good traction even when the vehicle is empty. But, because the engine is difficult to access, this concept has not caught on.
transmission a) Standard drive Transaxle drive.
1 Engine, 2 Step up gear unit with vibration absorber and power take up element, 3 Final drive differential, 4 Drive shaft, 5 Propeller shaft, 6 Tube.
UMM0726 4Y 1 2 a 1 2 3 b c d 4 5 e 1 5 6 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 4 3 2 4 3
engine speeds to the step up gear unit. The vibration isolation components reduce torsional vibrations at the crankshaft and thereby reduce noise and wear in the drivetrain.
Single clutch The clutch is the link between the engine and the step up gear unit, transmitting the engine torque through adherence by frictional forces to the input shaft of the step up gear unit.
pressed by a pressure pate pretensioned by the disk spring . A frictional connection is established between the engine flywheel and the clutch disk. The clutch disk is connected with torsional strength via the hub to the transmission input shaft.
1 Engine flywheel,  2 Clutch disk with clutch linings,  3 Pressure plate with support for diaphragm spring,  4 Drive plate,  5 From engine, 6 Crankshaft,  7 Torsion damper,  8 Pressure plate housing with support for diaphragm spring,  9 Pivot point for release fork, 10 Diaphragm spring with release tongues, 11 Release fork, 12 Transmission input shaft, 13 Release bearing, 14 Slave cylinder.
slave cylinder presses the release fork : forwards ; this in turn pushes the release bearing and with it the inner part of the diaphragm spring forwards in the direction of the clutch disk. The outer part of the diaphragm spring moves in the opposite direction and in so doing pulls the pressure plate away from the clutch disk. In this way, as the pressure on the clutch pedal increases, the transmitted torque decreases until the clutch is fully opened. When during driving off the force is slowly withdrawn via the clutch pedal, the diaphragm spring relaxes and increasingly presses the pressure plate against the engine flywheel. The transmitted torque increases and the vehicle drives off. When speed synchronization between the engine and the transmission has taken place, the drive off process is completed and the clutch is fully engaged.
Torsion damped clutch disks with torsional vibration springs on the inside damp engine vibrations and protect the transmission. They also serve to ensure a smooth clutch response when driving off. Single disk clutches are used in both passenger cars and commercial vehicles.
Double disk clutch In rare cases there are versions for higher torques with two clutch disks . This version would be chosen if the single disk clutch were too large in diameter or the contact pressure were too great to transmit the required torque.
Both clutch disks act on only one transmission input shaft. For this reason, the double disk clutch too belongs to the category of single clutches.
Dry clutch Dry clutch Clutch linings for dry clutches consist for example of organic materials which are bound by resins. The materials used are similar to those of brake pads/linings. The aim is to achieve a high coefficient of friction for the clutches so as to keep the operating force and the diameter of the clutch small.
1 From driving engine, 2 Hub, to transmission, 3 Clutch disk 1 with lining, 4 Clutch disk 2 with lining.
automatic transmissions and front there via air convection.
Control devices Hydraulic clutch actuation Hydraulic clutch actuation The master cylinder of the hydraulic control device is mechanically connected to the clutch pedal. The hydraulic fluid is withdrawn from the expansion tank for brake fluid. When the clutch pedal is pressed, pressure is built up in the clutch on the slave cylinder connected via a hose and the clutch opens as a result.
Clutch actuation for commercial vehicles Clutch actuation for commercial vehicles Large forces on the release bearing are required to actuate commercial vehicle clutches. For light commercial vehicles compressed air boosted hydraulic systems are used to reduce the foot force on the clutch pedal. For heavy commercial vehicles electromechanical or electropneumatic systems are used .
Dual clutch The dual clutch .
cooled multi disk clutches. These are very similar clutch elements as are used as power shift elements in automatic planetary transmissions. Actuation is effected by co rotating pistons, which generate an axial force by means of hydraulic pressure. When the disks are pressed together with increasing axial force, the torque that can be transmitted via the clutch increases .
1 Torsion damper, 2 From driving engine, 3 From vibration isolation, 4 Solid shaft , 6 Clutch 1, 7 Clutch 2, 8 Piston for clutch 1, 9 Piston for clutch 2.
hydrodynamic torque converter 1 Lockup clutch, 2 Torsion damper, 3 From driving engine, 4 To transmission input shaft, 5 Connection to transmission housing, 6 Impeller, 7 Turbine, 8 Stator, 9 One way clutch.
The turbine and the impeller rotate in such a way that the visible front moves downward. The stator, which would like to move in the conversion range in the opposite direction, is supported via a oneway clutch on the transmission housing. The round arrows in the figure on the left symbolize the direction of the oil flow. 1 Turbine,  2 Stator,  3 Impeller,  4 Hollow shaft for stator support, 5 Housing , 10 Direction of turbine rotation, 11 Oil flow direction, 12 Direction of impeller rotation.
UMM0734 2Y UMM0735 1Y 10 b a 1 7 2 3 4 5 6 3 2 1 11 12 8 9 4 5 6 1 2 3 9 7 8
in the neighboring turbine. The deflection : of the oil flow to these vanes induces a torque which acts on the transmission input shaft. Because the conversion takes place using the hydrodynamic inertia of the oil, the hydrodynamic torque converter operates without wear.
With regard to the torque converter the pump torque is an input torque and hence the preceding sign is positive, while the turbine torque is an output torque and hence the preceding sign is negative.
in hydrodynamic torque converter 1 Stall point, 2 Torque MT at turbine or torque conversion factor g, 3 Drive torque MP at impeller.
0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 100 300 200 400 500 Nm 0 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 Speed ratio nT /nP Torque M Torque conversion factor g 1 2 a b 3 UMM0736 1E
When the torque conversion factor g has : dropped to 1, the oil flow acts on the stator vanes against the previous torque direction. The one way clutch, which constitutes the connection between the stator and the transmission housing, transmits no torque in this direction. The stator now also rotates without torque in the oil flow. The co rotation of the stator prevents an unwanted deflection of the oil flow in the clutch range and consequently a deterioration of the converter efficiency.
Lockup clutch Even in the clutch range the turbine never quite reaches the speed of the impeller; a speed difference of 2 to 3 % remains. Without this slip no torque could be transmitted. To keep the losses in the converter at nT nP as low as possible, hydrodynamic transmission is locked up by a multi disk clutch. Here the turbine shaft i.e., the transmission input shaft is coupled for example with the converter housing. To maintain the high vibration comfort of hydrodynamic isolation, one or more torsion dampers are incorporated in the lockup clutch's power transmission path.
Advantages of the hydrodynamic torque converter Because of the converter increase when driving off, the hydrodynamic torque converter is highly suitable for vehicles that have to tow heavy trailers . Further advantages are derived from this power take up element not being subject to wear and the excellent ride comfort attributable to hydrodynamic torque transmission. Vibration isolation A significant requirement imposed on the drivetrain is comfort. The requirements imposed on vibration isolation are increasing continuously since optimizations in the combustion process of engines, smaller engine displacements with turbocharging, lower engine speeds in all driving ranges, and reduced numbers of cylinders do indeed lower fuel consumption but, due to high crankshaft radial accelerations, cause a higher rotational irregularity of the combustion engine torque.
The purpose of vibration isolation is to reduce the torsional vibrations that occur as a result of the design of the internal combustion engine. Vibration isolation can be effected by slip at the power take up element, by damping the irregularity, by temporarily storing energy in a spring, by absorption, or by a combination of several methods.
damper , 3 Secondary flywheel, 4 To power take up element.
converted into heat. This energy is thus : lost to the actual drive. Therefore this vibration isolation option is now only used sporadically in critical vibration situations .
Torsion damper and dual mass flywheel The torsion damper consists of coil springs arranged in a circle between the engine and the power take up element and output this energy again to the transmission inlet. It is possible by varying the spring stiffness and diameter to adapt the torsion damper to the respective combination of engine and drivetrain.
In the case of the dual mass flywheel, the mass of the engine flywheel is split and the torsion damper is placed between the two flywheel masses , which are pivoted against each other via a separate thrust and radial bearing arrangement. The moment of inertia on the transmission side is increased by apportioning to the primary flywheel mass on the engine side and to the secondary flywheel mass on the transmission side. Low spring stiffness can bring about a specifically "soft" harmonization of the spring units which connect the two flywheel masses to each other. As a result, the resonant frequency of the dual mass flywheel is shifted significantly below the idle speed of the engine and the exciting engine orders. A natural oscillation of the dual mass flywheel is avoided in this way. Dual mass flywheels are used in vehicles from the compact class upwards.
Centrifugal pendulum type absorber In the case of the centrifugal pendulum type absorber the rotational irregularity is balanced by means of a counterforce by vibrating masses additionally mounted in the torsion damper . Thanks to suitable lever conditions the vibrating masses can be selected at a proportionally small level compared with the mass of the internal combustion engine to be isolated. The centrifugal pendulum type absorber is speed adaptive since the centrifugal acceleration on the vibrating mass increases as the rotational speed increases.
Centrifugal pendulum type absorbers are more expensive to manufacture, but have the advantage of lower weight compared with dual mass flywheels. They are used in vehicles from the compact class upwards.
_________________________________ References References H. Naunheimer; B. Bertsche; J. Ryborz; W. Novak; P. Fietkan: Fahrzeuggetriebe Grundlagen, Auswahl, Auslegung und Konstruktion. 3rd Edition, SpringerVerlag, 2019.
absorber and torsion damper 1 From driving engine, 2 To power take up element, 3 Centrifugal pendulum type absorber mass, 4 Helical spring .
Different gear ratios are implemented in : the manual transmission for the purpose of adapting the torque made available by the engine and the power to the respective driving situation and to the driver's requests. Each gear ratio is called a gear or speed. Together with the transmission ratio of the final drive differential the high engine speed is converted to the wheel speeds required for driving.
Manually shifted transmissions are a combination of step up gear units and gear shift elements. The vibration isolation and the power take up elements are arranged between the engine and the transmission .
one gear to another. Rotational speeds and torques are inversely proportionally converted with this gear ratio, with the power output apart from efficiency remaining the same. The advantages of a step up gear train lie in its high power density through slip free transmission.
Depiction of the power flow in the various gears. 1 Main shaft , 2 Countershaft, 3 Spur gear sets for the different gears, 4 Idler gear for reverse gear, 5 Synchromeshes, 6 Transmission input shaft.
teeth touch each other along a straight line of action. The aim of involute toothing is to achieve a high amount of rolling and an accordingly low amount of sliding during the transmission of torque in order to minimize wear and heat generation in the toothing. Further advantages of involute toothing are the high tolerance in relation to wheelbase tolerances and relatively simple manufacturability. Figure 3 shows the parameters for a gear.
Straight and helical toothing Helical gears are used for the most part in spur gear drives. On these gears the teeth are arranged not parallel with the gear axes, but at an angle to them . Instead, the bearing face width increases slowly as the gears continue to rotate until the teeth have contact over their full width. As the gears rotate out of the action zone the face width subjected to load also decreases slowly. In this way, the kinetic impulses when meshing are much smaller than on straight gears. Accordingly, fewer oscillations are excited, which provides for quieter running of the gears.
a) Schematic diagram, b) Structural design of a straight spur gear set, c) Structural design of a helical spur gear set. 1 Spur gear, 2 Axis.
forwards. Another advantage of helical : gears is their higher load capability in that more teeth are simultaneously engaged than on straight gears.
Helical toothing generates axial forces which must be absorbed by means of a suitable bearing arrangement. Moreover, they are more complex to produce than straight spur gears.
Spur gear set In spur gear sets the gears are arranged on parallel axes . Spur gears are easier to manufacture than internally toothed ring gears of a planetary gear set. Moreover, the axial offset between input and output suggests itself for front transverse drivetrains.
Planetary gear set The planetary gear set consists of a sun gear, an internally toothed ring gear, and several planetary gears. The planetary gears are interconnected by a carrier and mounted on this there are six different gear ratios which a planetary gear set can offer when connected appropriately. Furthermore, by joining the three elements to each other, it is possible to achieve a circulation of the planetary gear set as a block with the gear ratio one as the seventh ratio. However, the ratios of a planetary gear set are not so staged that a planetary gear set alone would be usable for the desired ratios of a passenger car transmission.
Thanks to the symmetrical design and the distribution of torque to several planetary gears, the power density in the planetary gear set is particularly high and accordingly the size in relation to the transmitted torque is small. Because of the coaxial position of the input and output shafts this type is particularly suitable for standard drivetrains. Several planetary gear sets combined via shift elements are predominantly used in automatic planetary transmissions.
A planetary gear set can also be used as a summation gearbox or transfer case. In this case, none of the planetary gear set elements are joined to the housing. When it is used as a summation gearbox, two elements of the planetary gear set are driven and output via the third element. When it is used as a transfer case, one of the planetary gear set elements operates as the drive while the other two operate as the output.
1 Sun gear, 2 Shaft for sun gear, 3 Planetary gears, 4 Ring gear, 5 Hollow shaft for ring gear, 6 Shaft with planetary gear carrier.
Gear shift elements: Function of Function of synchromesh synchromesh Manually shifted transmissions, automated manual transmissions, and dual clutch transmissions as a rule have for each gear a spur gear set whose teeth are permanently engaged . The control gears are all permanently driven by the opposing fixed gear in each case. When a gear is not engaged, the control gears consequently rotate at a speed different from the shaft.
In the event of a gear change the corresponding control gear is sped up or slowed down to the shaft speed. When synchronism is in place a non positive connection with the shaft is established. The device that brings about the equal rotational speeds is called a synchromesh.
1 Main shaft, 2 Movable control gear, 3 Control ring with clutch teeth,  4 Synchronizer body , 5 Compression spring,  6 Catch pin, 7 Sliding block, 8 Gearshift sleeve with dog toothing,  9 Synchronizer ring with inner cone and lockout teeth, 10 Movable control gear with synchronizer cone and shift toothing. UMM0739 2Y a b 2 4 5 8 9 10 6 7 3 1
synchronizer ring prevents the dog toothing : of the gearshift sleeve from meshing with the shift toothing before the control gear and shaft are synchronized . In this process the dog toothing of the gearshift sleeve contacts the tooth angles of the lockout toothing on the synchronizer ring and the friction torque of the synchronizer ring counteracts any evasion of the lockout toothing. Further rotation of the synchronizer ring relative to the gearshift sleeve is prevented by axially movable sliding blocks. The recesses for the sliding blocks in the synchronizer body are exactly the same width as the sliding blocks, while the recesses in the synchronizer ring are slightly wider. In this way, the synchronizer ring can, as pictured in Figure 7, move relatively through a small angle. The sliding blocks transmit the torque from the synchronizer body to the synchronizer ring. The external teeth on the synchronizer body, synchronizer ring and shift toothing are dimensioned in such a way that they can establish positive locking with the dog toothing of the gearshift sleeve.
Once the synchronization of the control gear and the shaft is achieved, the synchronizing torque and consequently also the torque acting on the lockout toothing are zero. The applied shift force FS now induces, via the tooth angles of the synchronizer ring lockout toothing, the synchronizer ring to rotate relative to the gearshift sleeve so that the shift sleeve dog toothing can be slid over the synchronizer ring lockout toothing into the control gear shift toothing. This establishes positive locking between the shaft and the control gear. Increased shift force can reduce the synchronizing time, but in the long term this will cause increased wear of the friction lining on the synchronizer ring. Also, the lockout toothing can be turned back by increased shift force already before synchronization and the shift sleeve dog toothing advanced up to the control gear shift toothing. When the shift sleeve dog teeth and the shift toothing on the control gear engage at different speeds, this results in "gear shift rasping".
Multi cone synchromesh Multi cone synchromesh Synchromeshes with two or three conical friction surfaces arranged on top of each other are used to synchronize components with high mass inertia. These are referred to as double cone or triple cone synchromesh.
Often two and sometimes even three characteristic forms of synchromesh are fitted in transmissions. For the most part the control gears of first gear and reverse gear are equipped with triple cone synchromesh because here the differences in speed between the gearshift sleeve and the loose running control gear are greater than in higher gears. The control gears of second and third gears are equipped with double cone synchromesh, and the other gears with single cone synchromesh. The advantage of this arrangement in manually shifted transmissions is that the shift forces are similarly high for all the gears.
1 Dog toothing on gearshift sleeve, 2 Lockout toothing on synchronizer ring, 3 Shift toothing on control gear, 4 Synchronizer ring, 5 Control gear, 6 Relative motion of synchronizer ring  in relation to gearshift sleeve.
Multi disk clutch: A multi disk clutch usually consists of a number of inner and outer disks. The inner disks have on their inside diameter synchronization toothing for example for joining the clutch to components in the transmission, while the outer disks have the synchronization toothing on their outside diameter . A disk is glued in each friction contact with a paper like lining; as a rule this is the disk with the internal toothing. The other disk has a smooth steel surface.
The disks are axially movable thanks to the connection via the toothing. They can be pressed together by means of a hydraulic mechanism so as to create non positive connection.
A higher torque can be transmitted for the same operating force by the use of a number of alternately stacked inner and outer disks and the greater lining surface area thereby obtained. To ensure that the multi disk clutch is efficiently cooled, the paper lining has grooves for a constant throughflow of cooling oil.
The oil cooled starting clutch and the dual clutch are distinct types of the multidisk clutch. Multi disk clutches are of fundamental importance to the function of automatic planetary transmissions, in which the gear to be shifted is introduced into the energy flow with frictional engagement and without interruption of tractive force. Multi disk brake The multi disk brake is a special type of multi disk clutch. The multi disk brake differs in that for example the outer disks are connected to a non rotating component such as the transmission housing and the clutch disks are stationary in the closed state while the elements of a multi disk clutch rotate in the closed state. The multidisk brake can be used for example to support a planetary gear set element against the transmission housing in order to effect a transmission ratio.
Manually shifted : transmissions Design Manually shifted transmissions . The different ratios of the numbers of teeth per spur gear pair produce the different gear ratios.
In a double shaft transmission the gears are seated on the main shaft or the countershaft. All the gears are permanently mounted on these shafts and as a result all the spur gear pairs are engaged. Each spur gear pair of a gear has a fixed gear, which is permanently connected to a shaft, and a movable gear .
for a standard drive 1 From driving engine, 2 Dual mass flywheel, 3 Clutch,  4 Constant transmission ratio , 11 Transmission output shaft, 12 Idler gear for reverse gear.
sleeve and gearshift equipment 1 Main shaft, 2 Gearshift rod, 3 Gearshift fork, 4 Control gear, 5 Control ring, 6 Gearshift sleeve toothing, 7 Gearshift sleeve.
1 2 4 5 6 7 3 UMM9766Y 8 7 5 4 5 5 6 5 VI IV II I V III R 1 9 2 3 10 11 8 8 6 6 6 8 8 8 8 6 12
Manually shifted transmissions for the most : part have five to six forward gears and one reverse gear. The spacing  of the transmissions is roughly four to eight. Manually shifted transmissions belong to the category of tractive force interrupted transmissions. To change a transmission step the power flow must be disconnected by the clutch.
Transmissions for standard drive The designs for a standard drive . The direction of the power flow is not altered. The direction of rotation of the output shaft is the same apart from for the reverse gear as the direction of rotation of the input shaft because the power flow is provided via spur gear pairs or in direct gear without transmission ratio by gears. A constant transmission ratio transmits the engine power from the transmission input shaft to the countershaft. The control gears of the different transmission ratios are coupled by means of synchromeshes to the main shaft or countershaft so that the power flow can be delivered via the spur gear pair in question to the transmission output.
Transmissions for front wheel drive Types with one countershaft have established themselves in front wheel drives. In a front wheel drive the final drive unit with differential is integrated in the transmission. Double shaft transmissions Double shaft transmissions In the double shaft transmission in Figure 13 the fixed gears are seated on the input shaft and the control gears are non rotationally connected to the countershaft according to the selected gear. This is a transmission without out of plane shafts because the input and output shafts do not lie in the same plane. This is because only one spur gear pair is used to establish a transmission ratio.
for a standard drive 1 Transmission input shaft, 2 Synchromeshes, 3 Gearshift linkage, 4 To final drive unit, 5 Countershaft. I...VI First through sixth gear, R Reverse gear.
Triple shaft transmissions: Triple shaft transmissions Splitting the transmission steps between two parallel countershafts enables the transmission to be short in its construction. The gears of the transmission input shaft drive the gears on the two countershafts . Seated on these shafts are the synchromeshes, which couple the gear responsible for the selected gear to the corresponding countershaft. In each case one gear on the countershafts meshes with the spur gear of the differential.
Depending on the gear selected, one gear or the other is non rotationally coupled with the corresponding countershaft and drives the spur gear of the differential. The space required for components is reduced thanks to the control gears and the synchromeshes being split between two countershafts.
The overall length can be further optimized for a triple shaft transmission by the double use of fixed gears on the drive shaft. Here one fixed gear meshes with two control gears  on the different countershafts.
Application Manually shifted transmissions are still popular in Europe even in new vehicles. In the USA and Asia the demand for manually shifted transmissions is declining, apart from in certain sports cars.
1 From driving engine, 2 Torsion damper, 3 Clutch, 4 Synchromeshes, 5 Output constant, 6 Differential spur gear, 7 Differential, 8 To wheels.
Automated manual : transmissions Design Automated manual transmissions  which are actuated by a transmission control unit. Figure 15 shows the basic design of an electromechanical system. As is the case for operating the clutch, servomotors are used to operate the synchromeshes and thereby change gear. This helps to provide the operating comfort of a fully automatic transmission. The driver can choose between fully automatic control and manual input of the gear. There is, however, no clutch pedal.
With the electrohydraulic control system, actuation is essentially performed via an electrically driven hydraulic pump, a pressure accumulator, and a hydraulic actuation unit with the actuators for selecting the gears.
Advantages and disadvantages Like the manually shifted transmission, the automated manual transmission is a tractive force interrupted transmission, which gives rise to disadvantages in shifting comfort compared with other automatic transmission construction types. However, the interruption of tractive force is generally shorter than in a manually shifted transmission.
Application Automated manual transmissions are used as standard in the commercial vehicle sector, but have not been able to make the breakthrough in the passenger car sector. The reason for this is the poor comfort due to the interruption of tractive force during the gearshift.
6 speed transmission for front transverse drive 1 Input shaft, 2 Electronic clutch management, 3 Central disengaging gear, 4 Fixed gears, 5 Pivoted control gears, 6 Gearshift sleeve, 7 Gearshift linkage, 8 Servomotors.
The gears are usually lubricated by direct splash oil. The oil is supplied by a mechanically driven oil pump or an electric oil pump. The oil cooler optionally mounted on the transmission is integrated in the cooling circuit.
1 From driving engine, 2 Dual mass flywheel, 3 Dual clutch, 4 Countershaft, 5 Synchromeshes, 6 Spur gear sets, 7 Idler gear for reverse gear, 8 To final drive unit.
1 2 3 8 4 5 5 5 5 IV VI II I VII V III R 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 A B UMM0746 1E
of an automatic transmission. But only : one gear on the other sub transmission can ever be preselected. However, multiple upshifts or multiple downshifts can be achieved sequentially or by means of so called support shifts via an intermediate gear .
The reverse gear can be assigned to either the even or the odd sub transmission. In Figure 16 the reverse gear is assigned to the even sub transmission. The direction of rotation is reversed by an idler gear. All the synchromeshes are moved into the center position once Neutral has been selected with the gearshift lever. As a result no gear is engaged. When the engine is stopped the two clutches are open. The transmission therefore needs a parking lock. A parking lock gear engages the spur gear of the final drive unit. A locking pawl blocks the parking lock gear when the gearshift lever is moved into the P position. In the Park position the mechanical parking lock stops the vehicle from rolling away. The clutches are used both for load sharing during shifting and for the driveoff process.
Advantages and disadvantages The advantage of dual clutch transmissions is that, unlike automatic planetary transmissions, they are suitable for engine speeds in excess of 7,000 rpm. Dual clutch transmissions are therefore used in among others sports cars.
The spur gear construction in dual clutch transmissions facilitates advantageous gear set versions especially in front transverse transmissions with their axial offset between transmission input and transmission output shafts. In these gear sets the final drive differential, unlike an automatic planetary transmission, is driven directly by the countershafts, providing for less meshing and consequently greater transmission efficiency in front transverse transmissions.
In contrast to a transmission with a hydrodynamic torque converter there is no torque multiplication in a dual clutch transmission when driving off. Therefore a greater transmission ratio and thus a greater transmission spacing are required in first gear.
1 From driving engine, 2 Countershaft, 3 To final drive unit, 4 Synchromeshes, 5 Dual clutch. I...VII First through seventh gear  , R Reverse gear, A Sub transmission  with even gears, B Sub transmission  with odd gears.
for a standard drive 1 From driving engine, 2 Torsion damper, 3 Hydrodynamic converter, 4 Multi disk brakes, 5 Planetary gear sets, 6 Multi disk clutches, 7 To final drive unit.
mally developed to drive constantly in the : internal combustion engine's optimum consumption and performance range. For a larger number of gears additional shift elements or planetary gear sets are required which diminish the efficiency of the transmission and hence the drivetrain in most driving situations. The energy that is required for the greater number of gear shifts can no longer be compensated by better utilization of the combustion engine program map.
Advantages and disadvantages The planetary gear sets have coaxial input and output. This results in advantageous transmission construction types particularly for the standard drive, where the engine crankshaft and the axle differential drive are on the same axis . Since the transmitted power is shared in the planetary gear sets between a number of planetary gears spread over the circumference, automatic planetary transmissions are characterized by a high power density. The comfort of a power shift transmission is achieved by targeted overlapping shifts of the clutches.
The hydrodynamic torque converter provides for high driveaway and maneuvering comfort. The torque multiplication in the converter has a positive effect on the vehicle's driveaway performance. The slip in the converter is eliminated with a converter lockup clutch. This reduces the losses in this transmission and makes it efficient, even in comparison with manual transmissions.
Application Automatic planetary transmissions, owing to their type of construction, are used in vehicles with longitudinally installed engines, i.e., in mid range vehicles and upwards, but also in buses.
for a standard drive 1 From driving engine, 2 Torsion damper, 3 Hydrodynamic  converter, 4 Multi disk brakes, 5 Planetary gear sets, 6 Multi disk clutches, 7 To final drive unit.
Continuously variable : transmissions Power and torque transmission  via variator In continuously variable transmissions . This axial displacement changes the spacing between the pulleys and with it the radius on which the pushbelt or the chain runs. The combination of different, infinitely variable running radii on the two V pulley sets products the variator's gear ratio.
The transmission of torque from one V pulley set to the other is based on friction. The required frictional force is achieved by hydraulically pressing together the pulleys of each V pulley set. Each loose pulley contains one or two hydraulic pistons to which oil pressure is applied by the control system. The amount of pressure must be determined for each V pulley set. The force that must be exerted on the pushbelt or the chain depends on the instantaneous torque, the gear ratio, and the desired gear ratio. The pressure is then calculated taking account of the required force, the surface of the piston , and the actual rotational speed of the V pulley set. The centrifugal force effect also generates a pressure which must be taken into account.
design of a CVT. On the input side a power take up element is used, usually a torque converter and a differential are arranged after the variator. Figure 21 does not show the control system and the parking mechanism.
Because of the relatively large center distance between the variator input and output, CVTs are best suited for use in a front transverse drive . However, they are also used in combination with longitudinally installed engines.
Open loop control Actuation, cooling and lubrication of the CVT is performed by an electronically controlled hydraulic system. The electronic control system uses a number of sensors and actuators in the transmission and information from other systems in the vehicle which is normally transmitted via a CAN bus.
a continuously variable transmission 1 From driving engine, 2 Torsion damper, 3 Hydrodynamic torque converter  with lockup clutch,  4 Oil pump, 5 Reverse gear brake, 6 Forward gear clutch, 7 Belt variator, 8 First V pulley set , 10 Belt or chain, 11 Final drive differential, 12 To the wheels, 13 Differential.
The hydraulic unit contains values that : control the oil pressure or the flow to a number of components in the CVT. The oil is supplied by an engine driven pump, usually a gear pump or a vane pump. In the last few years more and more CVTs are being equipped with an additional  electric oil pump which keeps the hydraulic system filled when the engine is shut down by a start/stop system. The oils used in CVTs are special oils similar to ATF which are optimized in terms of their friction properties.
CVT features Because the gear changes take place with continuous variability, the CVT offers a high level of ride comfort without tractive force interruption. Unusual driveability as experienced by some drivers can be avoided by using under certain circumstances programmed "fixed" gear ratios.
A transmission spacing with a factor of up to 7.3 enables the engine to be operated in a wide speed and load range, which is beneficial in terms of both power output and fuel consumption. This benefit outweighs the naturally higher losses of a friction based transmission. With regard to mechanical efficiency, the wrap chain fares slightly better than the pushbelt. However, the pushbelt is better when it comes to NVH .
Applications CVTs are used in passenger cars with both internal combustion engines and hybrid drives. CVTs for electric vehicles are being developed. CVTs for vehicles with lower power output such as mopeds, snowmobiles and side by side vehicles  frequently use a dry rubber belt variator and a mechanical control system.
1 To wheel, 2 From driving engine, 3 Hydrodynamic torque converter, 4 Second V pulley set, 5 Wrap belt , 6 To wheel, 7 First V pulley set.
Commercial vehicle : transmissions Commercial vehicle transmissions differ significantly in their dimensions from passenger car transmissions. The reasons for this are not only higher engine torques and engine power output, but also above all the much higher mileage demands of sometimes over one million kilometers. The commercial vehicle sector features predominantly manually shifted transmissions, automated manual transmissions, and automatic planetary transmissions. Manually shifted transmissions and automated manual transmissions The standard construction has gained acceptance as the drivetrain concept in trucks with a gross weight rating of over 3.5 tons. The high loads on the rear powered axle and the associated potential high drive force of the drive wheels are the reason for this drivetrain concept.
box and range change box 1 From driving engine, 2 Torsion damper, 3 Clutch, 4 Constant transmission ratio 1, 5 Synchromesh, 6 Shift dogs, 7 Housing connection, 8 Planetary gear set, 9 Countershafts, 10 To final drive unit, 11 Constant transmission ratio 2 . I...IV First through fourth gear in main box. R Reverse gear.
A Main box, B Splitter box, C Range change box. 1 2 3 10 4 B C 5 5 7 8 6 6 6 IV II I III R A 9 9 11
of the four gears of the main box. Often the : splitter box is used with a full payload since only small gear steps are possible for the very high vehicle weights in relation to the drive power. When the truck is unladen, the ratio of engine power to vehicle weight is much more favorable such that the greater gear steps of the main box can be shifted without using the splitter box.
Splitter and main boxes transmit the torque in the transmission variant shown in Figure 23 to two countershafts. This enables narrower gear widths despite the very high torques in the truck and a smaller center distance between the shafts to be chosen.
Mounted downstream of the main box is a range change box. The transmission step between the two gears of the range change box corresponds to the ratio spacing of the main box from first to fourth gear. This means that when shifting the range change box gear from slow to fast gear at the same time the main box is shifted from fourth to first gear and vice versa. In this way, the spacing of the main box is utilized twice. In this way, multiplying two splitter gears by four gears of the main box and two gears of the range change box produces the maximum number of gears for these transmissions of 16 possible forward gears. Synchromesh Synchromesh During the gear change in the main box the movable gears are coupled with the shaft gears via shift dogs. The rotational speeds of the gears must be matched in the process. This task is performed by the synchromesh in manual transmissions for passenger cars. In a truck transmission the components of the synchromesh mechanism are not in the main box for weight reasons. In a manually shifted transmission it is therefore necessary to double declutch when downshifting and double clutch when upshifting. In this way the rotational speed of the transmission is adapted to the gear to be selected.
Accordingly, gearshifts for a manually shifted transmission on the one hand are uncomfortable and on the other hand need time for the driving speed to decrease again. For this reason automated manual transmissions have become prevalent in the truck sector. The rotational speed for the gearshift is adapted by means of the electronic transmission control.
Automatic planetary transmissions The longitudinally or transversally mounted rear engine has gained acceptance in buses in order to guarantee maximum transport space for passengers and luggage.
The automatic planetary transmissions used predominantly in buses as a rule have six gears. These transmissions have essentially the same design as those in a passenger car, but their dimensions are adapted to the higher torque and mileage demands.
________________________________ References References P. Gerigk; D. Bruhn; J. Gobert: Kraftfahrzeugmechatronik Nutzfahrzeugtechnik, 1. Aufl., Westermann Schulbuchverlag, 2016.
A differential has one input and two outputs. : Differentials are most commonly used as final drive differentials. Their purpose is to distribute uniformly the torque to the two drive wheels when driving straight ahead and when cornering. In all wheel drive vehicles differentials are used as transfer cases to distribute torque between the vehicle axles.
Final drive differentials The final drive differential distributes the torque coming from the manual transmission uniformly to the two drive shafts of a vehicle axle. Since when cornering the inner cornering wheel describes a smaller circle and thus turns more slowly than the outer cornering wheel, the final drive differential must be able to compensate differential speeds between the drive wheels on an axle.
ential drive gear) transmits the torque via the differential case to the axle shafts of the differential bevel gears. The differential bevel gears distributes the torque to the two drive shaft gears.
When the vehicle is driving straight ahead the two drive shaft gears rotate at the same speed. The differential bevel gears circulate at the speed of the bevel crown wheel without rotating about their own axle shaft. They act as drivers and distribute the torque uniformly to the two drive shafts.
When cornering the differential bevel gears compensate the difference in speed of the drive shafts by rolling off on the drive shaft gears rotating at different speeds. In this process the differential bevel gears rotate on their axle shafts, which are mounted in the differential case.
between the bevel gear pinion and the : bevel crown wheel. However, this can be successfully countered with particularly pressureand shear resistant hypoid gear oils.
In front transverse transmissions the bevel gear pinion and the bevel crown wheel are replaced by two spur gears acting as pinion and differential drive gear . Since the differential gears are designed as bevel gears, this design type is still classed as a bevel gear differential.
Spur gear differential In a spur gear differential the differential gears are designed as spur gears. There are various design types which utilize the different connection forms of planetary transmissions. In the differential pictured in Figure 4 the torque is routed via the differential drive gear directly into the planetary gear carrier. The planetary gear carrier distributes the torque to the planetary gears arranged in pairs on both sides. The planetary gears of a pair mesh with each other in each case with half the face width. The outer halves of the planetary gears mesh with the sun gears. The sun gears direct the torque in each case to the drive shafts . Unlike a standard planetary transmission, there is no ring gear here. The differential case is the planetary gear carrier for both planetary gear sets. Sun gear 1 is at the same time drive shaft gear 1, sun gear 2 is drive shaft gear 2. Planetary gears 2 in Figure 4 are drawn with dashed lines because they are offset to the rear in the leaf plane and interlocked with planetary gears 1 with half the face width.
same speed. The planetary gears circu : late at the speed of the differential drive gear without rotating about their own axle shaft. They act as drivers and distribute the torque uniformly to the two drive shaft gears.
When cornering the planetary gears compensate the difference in speed of the drive shafts by rolling off on the sun gears rotating at different speeds. In this process the planetary gears rotate on their axle shafts in the planetary gear carrier. Locking differential A differential can transmit torque only as long as both vehicle wheels can transmit this torque to the roadway. As soon as the adhesion at a wheel breaks down , the wheel begins to spin. Since rotational speed but not torque is transmitted on the drive shaft of this wheel, the differential gears cannot be supported on the drive shaft gear of the spinning wheel and torque is transmitted to the other drive shaft gear. Consequently, the other wheel stops and transmits no drive torque, although adhesion with the roadway would be possible at this wheel in some cases.
a multi disk self locking differential 1 Bevel gear pinion, 2 Bevel crown wheel, 3 Axle shaft, differential bevel gear, 4 Drive shaft gear, 5 Differential case, 6 Multi disk clutch, 7 Thrust rings, 8 Differential bevel gear, 9 Edge, thrust ring.
1 Input, 2 Planetary gear 1,  3 Planetary gear carrier,  4 Output, drive shaft, left, 5 Sun gear 1, 6 Differential drive gear, 7 Planetary gear 2, 8 Differential case, 9 Output, drive shaft, right, 10 Sun gear 2. B C 1 3 2 4 5 7 6 A 8 9 2 a b 2 2 5 3 1 4 9 3 7 5 9 6 6 7 8 10 4 UMM0757 1Y UMM0756 1Y
clutch is installed in the differential case. The thrust rings are non rotationally connected to the differential case but can move axially to be able to press against the multi disk clutches. The axle shafts of the differential gears are mounted in recesses between the thrust rings . The axial forces that are produced during power transmission with bevel gears press the thrust rings onto the multi disk clutches, and this is done more intensely the more torque is transmitted in the bevel gear drive. The higher the transmitted torque, the higher the locking torque of the multidisk clutch can be.
With equally good adhesion at both wheels, the majority of the torque is transmitted via the thrust rings to the differential gears, which distribute the torque since they function as drivers uniformly to the two drive shafts .
If, due to the loss of adhesion at a wheel, a difference in speed arises between the two drive shafts and thus also between the differential case and the drive shafts, torque is transmitted by the pressed multidisk clutch to the drive shaft that is rotating at the slower speed.
The level of torque and hence the degree of differential locking are dependent on the number of disks and their coefficient of friction, which can be varied by way of different friction linings.
Beyond this design variant there are further solutions approaches for locking differentials, e.g. an actively activatable multi disk clutch between the drive shafts. Brake intervention with  locking differential effect Since the introduction of antilock braking systems and driving dynamics control  it has been possible to activate brakes of individual wheels. This opportunity is used to brake the faster wheel starting from a specific difference in speed between two drive shafts. Here, torque from the drive shaft rotating at the faster speed in relation to the body is supported via the brake. This enables the differential gears to transmit torque to the drive shaft rotating at the slower speed even without a lock in the differential. _________________________________ References References B. R. Hohn; K. Michaelis; M. Heizenrother: Kompaktes Achsgetriebe fur Fahrzeuge mit Frontantrieb und quer eingebautem Motor. ATZ Automobiltechnische Zeitschrift Edition 1/2006.
and axle shafts of differential bevel gears of a multi disk self locking differential The cutting plane is perpendicular to the cutting plane in Figure 5.
1 Spreading force, thrust rings, simultaneously contact pressure, multi disk clutch, 2 Application of force from differential case, 3 Edge, thrust rings, 4 Axle shaft, differential bevel gear . 4 3 2 1 1 UMM0758Y
Functions and requirements: Hydraulics Predominantly electronically actuated hydraulic systems are now used to control automated and automatic transmissions. Clutch actuators actuate dry clutches and gear selectors shift the gears in automated manually shifted transmissions and in dual clutch transmissions. Shift elements activate the multi disk clutches and multi disk brakes in wet clutches and in automatic planetary transmissions. The actuators, in this case the electrohydraulic actuators, serve as the connecting element between the electronics and the hydraulics. Actuators convert an electrical actuating signal output by the electronic control unit into an actuating force. Pressure control valves ensure precise control of pressure levels at the shift elements . As well as controlling, boosting, and distributing the hydraulic pressures and volumetric flows for the shift elements, this mechatronic system also supplies the torque converter, provides the lubricating pressure, and cools the automatic transmission.
STS0370 2E Sensors and setpoint generators Actuators Analog input signals Speed signals Digital input signals ECU Microcontroller Flash EPROM EEPROM RAM ADC CAN Diagnostics
Designation Actuator Shift element Installation location Transmission control Transmission Example Electrohydraulic actuator  Clutch Brake Clutch actuator Gear selector STS0371Y
The Economy mode or Sport mode can also be selected by intelligent control in the software depending on the driver's driving performance.
p1 Pressure at cutting in clutch, p2 Pressure at cutting out clutch, nM Engine speed, M Torque , M1 Torque at cutting in clutch, M2 Torque at cutting out clutch.
Figure 3 shows the upshift curve for shift : ing from first to second gear in Economy and in Sport modes, i.e., the accelerator pedal position and speed at which the gear shift takes place. The same applies to downshifting. There must be a gap between the upshift and downshift curves  to avoid gear hunting.
Driving situation detection Variables such as linear and lateral acceleration are used for driving situation detection, resulting in the detection of hills or corners. For this purpose progressive systems additionally incorporate the information from the navigation system in order to prepare future driving situations. The speed with which the accelerator pedal is pressed and the number of kick down operations in a defined period of time or the frequency of brake pedal operation serve to identify the type of driver . A complex control program selects the appropriate gear for the current operating conditions and driving style. In other words, it suppresses trailing throttle upshifts on the approach to and during corners, or automatically responds to slow throttle openings by activating a drive program for low engine speed upshifts.
Concepts which combine the high level of convenience of such "intelligent" gearshift programs with facilities for active adaptation to individual driver preferences have become very widespread. The selector levers of these systems have a second parallel gutter . Alternative solutions come in the form of paddles or +buttons on the steering wheel.
Converter lockup A converter lockup can be used in both multi speed and continuously variable transmissions. A mechanical lockup clutch can be employed to improve the efficiency of the transmission unit by eliminating torque converter slip. The variables employed to determine when conditions are suitable for activation of the converter lockup mechanism are engine load, transmission output shaft speed, and state of the transmission.
Control of shift quality The accuracy with which the pressure at the friction elements of the clutches is adjusted to the level of torque being transmitted ; this also reduces friction loss at the clutches and extends their service life.
Safety strategy: Special monitoring circuits and functions prevent transmission damage stemming from operator error, while the system responds to malfunctions in the electrical system by reverting to a backup mode. It is important to ensure at all times that vehicle instability does not arise.
with the sensors of electronic transmission control for a hydraulically actuated dual clutch transmission. The electronic module is screwed to the hydraulic control plate and is seated inside the transmission wholly or partly in the transmission oil pan. The module is subject to high tightness and heat resistance requirements in order to protect the electronics.
Electrically driven auxiliary oil pumps are increasingly used to generate the hydraulic pressure in line with demand, increase efficiency, and maintain the hydraulic pressure when the internal combustion engine is stopped are implemented either on the pump itself or as part of the electronic module.
Electrohydraulic actuators : Electrohydraulic actuators form the interface between the electronics with electrical signal processing and the hydraulics. They convert the low power actuating signals into an actuating force with the increased power required for the process. The actuators monitor the oil flow and the pressure characteristics in the hydraulic control plate for this purpose. Actuators are consequently essential final control elements and form the basis of electrohydraulic transmission control. A solenoid and a hydraulic valve together form an electrohydraulic actuator.
Solenoid valves The on off or PWM solenoid valves produce two different methods of converting an input signal .
1 Transmission connector .
ure 5). This design is called on off sole : noid valve, the associated hydraulic circuit is fashioned as either a normally closed .
The supply pressure pZ generated by the transmission oil pump is applied ahead of the flange and closes the ball seat when the valve is closed at zero current. Because there is no pressure applied in the operating pressure channel at zero current, the valve is "closed at zero current". In this state the operating pressure that supplies the consumers so that an applied pressure can decrease there or a contained oil volume can drain. When a current is applied to the switching valve winding the magnetic force draws the armature with the plunger connected to it towards the ball and opens the ball seat. The oil flows to the consumer and builds up the pump pressure there. At the same time the return to the transmission oil tank closes.
These solenoid valves are characterized by low costs, low leakages, simple activation electronics, and low susceptibility to dirt. However, they are used increasingly less owing to the rising complexity and comfort requirements of transmissions .
valve a) Cutaway view of valve, b) Activation and characteristic curve. 1 Supply from transmission oil pump, 2 Preliminary restrictor, 3 Return to transmission oil tank, 4 Solenoid coil, 5 Electrical connection.
valve) a) Cutaway view of a valve closed at zero current, b) Activation and characteristic curves. 1 Supply from transmission oil pump, 2 Operating pressure channel .
n. c. normally closed Output for n.c.
PWM valves are characterized by properties such as low costs, low susceptibility to dirt, simple activation electronics, and a small hysteresis. However, PWM valves are used increasingly less because they generate undesirable noises.
sign to the previously described standard PWM valve, but provides larger opening cross sections with a larger diameter and longer opening lift of the closing element. This design requires a larger copper winding with a higher magnetic force.
Pressure control valve, flat seat and spool designs Two different pressure control principles are used for analog valves: flat seat and spool pressure control valves . Both principles involve complete closed loop control circuits because the controlled pressure intervenes directly in the equilibrium of forces.
1 Transmission oil pump, 2 Variable helix, 3 Restrictor , 4 Return to transmission oil tank, 5 Plunger, 6 Solenoid coil, 7 Spring, 8 Electrical connection, 9 Control pressure, 10 Throughflow.
erates with an upstream restrictor which is integrated either in the external hydraulic control or in the pressure regulator. The restrictor has a significant influence of the pressure regulator characteristic, the precise matching of which is made possible by the integration of the restrictor in the pressure regulator. The ratio of the hydraulic resistances of the two restrictors cannot be arbitrarily small; a DR F therefore has a residual pressure. This is why the effective control range cannot decrease to 0 kPa. This also results in a permanent pressure regulator leakage. Energy losses are generated by this permanent oil flow into the transmission oil tank. To compensate for this, transmission oil pumps with a higher volumetric flow are required, which is detrimental to the overall energy efficiency of a transmission and also results in higher fuel consumption.
ratio at the inlet and outlet helices. Maximum pressure is obtained when the outlet helix is closed and zero pressure obtained when the inlet helix is closed. As in the flat seat pressure control valve the magnetic force, which is proportional to the current, the spring force, and the hydraulic pressure force, acts on the equilibrium of forces. The return of the controlled pressure to the sensing surface, e.g., the end face of the spool, via an internal channel closes the control loop. The control loop can also be closed via oil channels in the control plate. A spool pressure control valve can like a flat seat pressure control valve be designed with a rising or falling characteristic curve.
1 Supply from transmission oil pump, 2 Spool, 3 Solenoid coil, 4 Electrical connection, 5 Armature with plunger, 6 Return to transmission oil tank, 7 Control pressure, 8 Leakage.
Proportional solenoid Proportional solenoid Inserting a separating plane is between the hydraulic spool and the solenoid section of the spool pressure control valve produces a proportional and a spool. The advantage of this separation is the use of standardized proportional solenoids and functional adaptation by individual spools. Otherwise they are functionally identical to spool pressure control valves.
Not to be underestimated either are the experiences of the customer with the respective actuator types or even the effort to be applied in switching existing control concepts to other actuators.
Criterion DR Sl DR F Type DR S D26 falling curve D20 rising curve Supply pressure 28 26 23
Methods for controlling shift elements: There are two different pressure control variations to initiate the actuating process of a shift element : direct control and pilot control .
Pilot control Pilot control A large volumetric flow is required to enable a shift element .
and actuator types Multi speed transmission Function PWM x x x
________________________________ : References References W. Schmid: GS Seminar Getriebesysteme Aktuatorik zur Steuerung von Kfz Automatikgetrieben. Robert Bosch GmbH, Department GS TC/ENS, Presentation Documents, Schwieberdingen, 2008.
UTS0378 1Y 20 bar 6 1 2 5 4 7 20 bar 20 bar 0...6 bar 3 1 2 3 20 bar 20 bar 20 bar 6 l/min 4
Thermal engines: Operating principles and concept Internal combustion engines are classified as thermal engines. The essential feature of a thermal engine is cycle direction, which is characterized by the output of work.
Contrasting with thermal engines are heat pumps, also called refrigerating  machines, which are characterized by cycle direction in the opposite direction and require drive power in order to operate. The operating principle of thermal engines is always the same. A working medium is compressed, whereupon energy is supplied while the medium is compressed with a corresponding further increase in pressure. This is followed by an expansion with power output. In open cycles the working medium which has performed the work is discharged. In closed cycles the initial state must be re established by cooling the working medium before compression is restarted in open and closed cycles.
Thermal  engine Steam circuit Stirling Steam  engine Gas  turbine Jet  engine Reciprocating piston  engine Wankel  rotary  engine Thermodynamic reference cycle Rankine Ericson Steam cycle Joule Joule Seiliger 50 bar 40 bar 40 bar 200 bar 60 bar Typical minimum pressure 0.05 bar 1 bar 1 bar 1 bar 1 bar 1 bar 1 bar Typical max.
efficiency 40 % 30 % ~25 % 40 % 40 % ~ 42 % / ~ 45 % ~ 30 to 35 % Operating  concept Compression, Heating,  Evaporation, Super heating, Expansion, Condensing Compression, Heating, Expansion, Cooling Compression, Heating, Evaporation, Super heating, Expansion, Exhaust Induction, Compression, Combustion, Expansion Induction, Compression, Combustion, Expansion, Exhaust
bustion the energy chemically bound in the fuel is supplied as reaction heat to the cycle. Here compounds containing carbon and hydrogen oxidize with oxygen, which is why typically ambient air with approximately 21 % volume of oxygen makes up a significant part of the working medium. Cycle direction The factor that is crucial to cycle direction is the energy input. Here, a distinction is initially made between stationary energy input. What all piston engines including the Stirling engine have in common is a non stationary energy input which only ever occurs close to compression dead center with minimum cylinder volume.
A particular feature of all open cycles is an internal energy input which is achieved by the addition and combustion of fuel. In contrast, closed cycles require an energy input via heat exchangers. Here there is no direct contact between the working medium and combustion processes, with the exception of heat conduction. Unique in this context is the steam engine, which vaporizes the working medium by means of a heat flow from an external source and then supplies it to the piston engine. Another particular feature of the various thermal engines is the different energy sources which are used. Three different energy sources can be used: solids, liquids and gases. The main advantage of thermal engines which operate with an open cycle and an internal energy input is that they do not require any heat exchangers for cycle direction and are therefore compact in design. This advantage can be amplified by using liquid fuels with a high energy density. Gas engines, for example when deployed in passenger cars and commercial vehicles, are also becoming more attractive . The internal combustion engine can thus be derived from a selection of thermal engines.
Efficiency The internal combustion engine is characterized by open cycle direction with internal combustion. Non stationary operation facilitates the intake and compression of the working medium at mass averaged peak temperatures above 2,500 K and averaged peak pressures above 200 bar with a very good maximum efficiency above 40 %.
Stationary cycles, being limited by the properties of the materials, do not achieve mass averaged peak pressures and temperatures of this magnitude, but instead achieve maximum local peak temperatures around 2,500 K. Gas turbines therefore operate at a lower level of efficiency. The closed cycle of the steam circuit achieves a higher level of efficiency than gas turbines with a likewise moderate pressure of around 50 bar. This is achieved by a significant lowering of the low pressure level. The other thermal engines are much lower in terms of their maximum  efficiency.
Reciprocating piston engine The internal combustion engine, in its reciprocating piston engine variation, is the primary thermal engines used for mobile applications. A wide range of fuels is conceivable in principle, but diesel and gasoline are still the main energy sources used.
Real cycles A cycle is a thermodynamic process which has identical initial and final states . The cycle usually passes through several changes of state in such a way that with a thermal engine work is drawn from the cycle. Here the working medium of the cycle undergoes thermodynamic changes of state.
Ideal reference cycles are suitable for demonstrating basic correlations. In the case of new, as yet unknown engines, they help to provide an overview of their method of operation and efficiencies. However, a real cycle calculation is  required for detailed analyses.
Real cycles are set in proportion to the ideal cycles. This means that the heat capacities are considered for example depending on temperature or pressure.
The chemically altered composition of : the smoke gases is also approximated in the substance variables in order to take into consideration the changed physical properties based on combustion. In particular, what is assumed is not an adiabatic change of state, but rather at least one polytropic curve with an exponent adapted to the heat loss, or even the heat loss to the wall is used, e. g. with the  Woschni approach from the Reynolds similarity theory .
The charge cycle is calculated with its dissipation losses are modeled in detail.
One way to quickly assess real cycles is to describe them using an efficiency chain. Here the real cycles are successively depicted by taking individual characteristic quantities into account.
Diesel engines have at higher loads an effective efficiency of approx. 45 %, large slow running diesel engines have a much higher effective efficiency. Gasoline engines have, depending on the combustion process, an effective efficiency at their best point of approx. 42 %.
Normally, for calculation purposes, an ideal gas with temperature dependent heat capacities is assumed and the cycle is used with geometrically identical  dimensions, the same air ratio, without  residual exhaust gas, complete combustion, and thermally isolated walls. An  engine described in this way is also called a "perfect engine". The efficiency of cycle factor at full load is in the range of approximately 80 to 90 %.
If an ideal gas with constant heat  capacity is still to be used, it is possible to introduce the "efficiency of the perfect engine", which sets the power of the "perfect engine" in proportion to the power of the "ideal cycle".
________________________________ References References  G. Woschni, Die Berechnung der Wand verluste und der thermischen Belastung der Bauteile von Dieselmotoren, MTZ 31 .
of the reciprocating piston engine The hatched areas indicate the newly added work component of the characteristic efficiency  quantity. The efficiencies are explained in the text. Pressure  vs. volume diagram Designation Boundary  conditions Definition Efficiencies Theoretical reference cycle, e. g. constant volume cycle Ideal gas,  constant specific heat, infinitely rapid heat  addition and  dissipation, etc.
Theoretical  or thermal  efficiency Real high pressure working  cycle Wall heat losses, real gas, finitely rapid heat  addition and  dissipation, variable specific heat egHD Efficiency  factor  of the  high pressure  cycle Real charge cycle  Flow losses,  heating of the  mixture or the air, etc.
egLW Gas exchange  efficiency Mechanical losses,  cannot be suitably  represented in the pressure vs. volume diagram Losses due to friction, cooling, accessories Real engine em eth em ei em eeff p0 p p0 p p0 p V V V UMM0441 2Y eg
All internal combustion engines share the : common feature of combustion occurring after induction of the fresh mixture or air and after subsequent compression. In reciprocating piston engines with internal combustion this takes place close to top dead center .
The sequence of compression and subsequent combustion on the one hand has a significant impact on the pressure characteristic and thus on the efficiency and the torque output. On the other hand, this sequence defines the creation of emissions inside the engine. In this respect, gasoline and diesel engines differ in their process control.
Gasoline engine The characteristic feature of a gasoline engine is that it uses an external ignition source, normally an electrode spark plug. Ideally a suitable homogeneous air/fuel mixture is created to provide the required flammability. This is achieved by means of external mixture formation .
a) Course of combustion, b) Representation in the p V diagram Representation in the pt or pa diagram, p Pressure in cylinder, pmax Maximum pressure, QV Combustion heat, VC Dead volume, Vh Engine displacement,  t Time, a Crank angle, TDC Top dead center,  BDC Bottom dead center, IP Ignition point.
UMM0439 5E p pmax V IP IP TDC BDC BDC a c b BDC BDC TDC TDC p dQv dt t, a a Vh Vc BDC BDC TDC t, a IP
Operating strategy Stoichiometric Rich Lean Ultra lean Stratified charge operation  lean Mixture formation Homogeneous Heterogeneous and homogeneous Combustion chamber composition Fuel injection Intake manifold injection and direct injection Direct injection Ignition External  ignition source External  ignition source External  ignition source Autoignition External  ignition source Typical compression ratio 8...12 11...13 12...16 11...14 Load control Quantity Quality Operating range Entire program map Full load,  high speed range Entire program map Part load Part load Application, development stage Conventional, series Gas engines, series Research stage New combustion processes UMM0661E UMM0659 2E Fuel Air A/F  mixture
ameter is already less than 30 um. Here, droplet acceleration is proportional to the ratio of relative velocity to the air and to the droplet diameter.
to distribute more effectively in the combustion chamber, resulting in homogenization. An optimum combustion chamber design prevents intensive contact of fuel with the wall, since this always involves the risk of fuel condensation.
Gasoline direct injection Gasoline direct injection Gasoline direct injection does not utilize the mechanisms of mixture formation in the valve gap. A higher injection pressure of 50 to 350 bar is therefore required. Injection is completed by no later than the gas flow bottom dead center i.e. at the end of the induction stroke to allow sufficient time for homogenization during the compression stroke. Multiple injections are also carried out in the induction and compression strokes in order to achieve better homogenization. This increases the charge movement, which in turn encourages mixing. In heterogeneous combustion processes injection occurs only at the end of the compression stroke .
a) Characteristic flow situation in valve gap, b) Interaction between droplet diameter and relative velocity of droplets with regard to air flow.
Droplet diameter Relative velocity droplet/air 10 30 0 mm mm 50 mm 100 mm 100 1,000 a 1 2 3 b 100 12.5 75 50 m, D T m D 0 Time t % UMM0675 2E UMM0676 1E
a pressure level of 10 to 40 bar. This : equates to a temperature level of 300 to 500 degC, depending first and foremost on the ambient temperature and the compression ratio.
The advantage of direct injection is that the fuel is metered exactly. Vaporization of the fuel in the combustion chamber also requires the cylinder charge to be adequately cooled. This enables the compression ratio to be increased by roughly one unit, resulting in greater efficiency. Combustion in gasoline engines In all combustion processes combustion oxidation occurs only at the end of the compression phase and in the early expansion phase. The subsequent combustion process differs depending on the nature of mixture formation of the injected fuel is likewise homogenized up to the start of combustion.
Ignition Ignition Ignition is typically performed with the aid of an electrode spark plug. When a high voltage is applied, a sparkover occurs between the electrodes, depending on the mixture state between the electrodes are the main cause of large cyclic variations in a gasoline engine. This situation is improved by enlarging the electrode gap. Modern engines here already operate with a maximum value above 1 mm.
The ignition voltage demand rises as exhaust gas recirculation or leaning increases. UMM0662E a ms kV b Spark duration Mean pressure pme 0 0 10 20 1 2 Ignition voltage demand Mean pressure pme
The purpose of ignition is to ignite the air/: fuel mixture and thereby initiate the actual combustion process. Depending on the velocity of the subsequent combustion and on the piston speed .
a methane/propane mixture 1 Ignition energy for a static mixture, 2 Ignition energy for a mixture with a flow velocity of 6 m/s, 3 Ignition energy for a mixture with a flow velocity of 15 m/s.
It takes a few milliseconds for the flame to : reach a radius of around one centimeter in order to propagate unhindered from the piston recess and cylinder head at a velocity well in excess of 10 m/s.
Influences on flame velocity The decisive factor now is the propagation velocity of the flame, which is also referred to as the turbulent flame velocity. The faster the flame propagates, the better the combustion inside the engine. The following factors encourage a high flame velocity: a low proportion of inert gas, a temperature increase in the non combusted mixture, a pressure increase, and a high turbulence level.
advantage of slightly rich burn engine operation is the cooling effect provided by the excess fuel. Racing engines and passenger car engines in the rated output range are therefore operated with slightly rich mixtures.
Increasing the proportion of inert gas reduces the flame velocity. A practical application of inert gas variation is exhaust gas recirculation , in which combusted exhaust gas with the chief constituents CO2, H2O and N2 is added to the air/fuel mixture. As a rule of thumb an exhaust gas recirculation rate of 10 % already reduces the flame velocity by 20 %. The reason why modern gasoline engines can nevertheless be operated with high internal exhaust gas recirculation rates is the influence of temperature. Doubling the temperature increases the flame velocity by a factor of roughly 4.
Cylinder pressure has a lesser influence; an increase in pressure causes a slight acceleration of the flame velocity. Turbulences in the combustion chamber The turbulence level in the combustion chamber has the greatest influence on the combustion velocity. The flame velocity varies along roughly linear lines with the turbulence intensity. Turbulence intensity is a measure of the high frequency change in flow velocity at a given point in the combustion chamber . The turbulent kinetic energy is proportional to the square of the turbulence intensity.
Turbulence intensity is a three dimensional quantity which is influenced above all by the flow profile of the charge movement in the combustion chamber.
The velocity of the flow processes inside the engine that increases linearly to the greatest possible extent as engine speed increases is extremely important. As the flow velocity increases, so too does the turbulence intensity in the combustion chamber. This is the reason for stable engine operation over a very wide engine speed range. The flame would otherwise no longer be able to burn cleanly at increasing engine speed and consistent flame velocity because of the shorter time available for combustion. However, the positive contribution of turbulence cannot equal completely the influence of speed, which is why combustion at high speeds nevertheless stretches over a wider crankshaft range. This is an additional reason why gasoline engines operate with less efficiency at higher speeds.
In gasoline engines the turbulence in the combustion chamber is vitally important to energy conversion. The decisive factor in causing turbulence is the charge movement in the cylinder, which is fundamentally influenced by the intake flow .
Combustion causes a pressure increase which can also be simultaneously heard. For comfort reasons, suitable combustion adjustment measures must be taken to minimize this pressure increase as much as possible. This poses a conflict of objectives with thermodynamic efficiency. The maximum pressure increase gradient of gasoline engines is in the range of between 0.5 and 3 bar/degCA.
Combustion of partially homogeneous : Combustion of partially homogeneous mixtures mixtures Modern stratified charge combustion processes facilitate operation with excess air in the part load range. Effective mean pressures of pme < 1 bar make even operation with a mean excess air factor l > 5 possible in stratified charge operation. The main benefit here is the improved charge cycle, because throttling .
160 120 80 40 oCA 130 180 230 280 330 30 0 0 80 Crankshaft position Turbulent and mean kinetic energy 1 2 m2/s2 UMM0665 1E
an overlap of the three basic flows, which gives rise to complex three dimensional flow fields. Tumble and swirl essentially differ in their behavior inside the engine. Tumble flow disintegrates up to the moment when compression dead center is reached and contributes primarily to flame propagation in the first combustion half.
Swirl flow lasts longer into the subsequent expansion phase. The disintegration of the large swirls into ever decreasing, turbulent structures encourages the creation of turbulence. In the continuing process, however, the viscosity of the working medium results in a disintegration with a detrimental effect on the combustion velocity.
One of the greatest physical challenges associated with fashioning homogeneous combustion processes is the combustion behavior in the expansion phase, since typically over 10 % of the supplied fuel is still not converted 30deg CA after TDC. At this point the non combusted mixture is still only in the immediate vicinity of the wall and must still be converted after re emerging from the top land area between piston ring and cylinder wall . This phenomenon results in incomplete combustion in the final phase. Uncontrolled combustion Uncontrolled combustion Numerous undesirable processes make it difficult to fashion a homogeneous combustion process. In addition to cyclic variations, knock and auto ignition characteristics have detrimental effects. Extreme forms of advanced ignitions can occur, particularly in modern, highly turbocharged engines.
Cyclic variations Cyclic variations are a consequence of the premixed combustion of homogeneous combustion processes which reacts sensitively to numerous disturbance values . Such disturbance values are, for example, the mixture composition, the residual exhaust gas content, the thermodynamic state variables, and the flow profile. All the values vary from working cycle to working cycle and cause noticeable cyclic fluctuations in energy conversion. In particular, leaning with excess air of more than 40 % increases the cyclic variations significantly. Initiation of ignition has the greatest influence on cyclic variations.
0o  120o 120o  240o 240o  360o 360o Crankshaft angle 0 25 50 75 bar Cylinder pressure UMM0667E
progressing combustion reaches the ig : nition temperature and burns almost simultaneously without a further controlled flame propagation. The pressure pulsations generated in the process result in material wear in the engine bearings and cause serious engine damage in the event of prolonged operation. The temperature peaks can also result in damage to components. Typically, knocking only then occurs in a working cycle if 80 % of the fuel in the combustion chamber has not been combusted. Knocking can be observed particularly at low engine speeds with suitably sufficient time for auto ignition and at high loads with high combustion chamber temperatures. Fuels with high ignition temperatures such as, for example, methane or ethane reduce knock sensitivity. Knocking combustion can be reduced by shifting the energy conversion in the retardation direction . Useful measures to counter knocking include effective cylinder cooling of the hot areas, for example also by the vaporization effect of gasoline direct injection, increasing the turbulence, reducing the geometrical compression ratio, and optimizing the fuel, for example with additives.
and knocking combustion a) Example of knocking combustion, b) Effect of compression ratio and air/fuel ratio on the operating limits . Direct injection instead of intake manifold injection and increased turbulence shift the operating limits. a b 270deg 360deg 450degCA Crank angle Knock operation Oxygen deficiency With gasoline direct injection With manifold injection Increased turbulence, oxygen excess 0 8 10 12 14 16 0.5 1.5 2.0 1 Combustion knock Normal combustion TDC Trailing throttle Air/fuel ratio l Compression ratio e Pressure p UMM0668 2E
Pollutant formation and pollutant : reduction in gasoline engines In addition to the unavoidable combustion products of carbon dioxide .
Pollutants Pollutants Nitrogen oxides Nitrogen oxides .
Hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide Hydrocarbons are the result of incomplete combustion. In rich burn operation there is, on account of the lack of oxygen, an increase in both HC and CO emissions. In lean burn operation with accordingly reduced flame temperature a more intensive extinguishing of the flame is encountered, above all in the fire land area close to the wall, with a resulting increase in HC emissions. Because of the excess oxygen the slightly oxidizable CO emissions are nevertheless reduced.
Soot and particulates Engines with intake manifold injection cause primarily in extreme rich mode increased soot emissions. These are however lower compared with gasoline engines with direct injection. With the Euro 6c emission control standard the particulate limit for gasoline engines with Direct Injection has been reduced to 1/10 of the value applicable to Euro 6b such that a particulate filter must be used in many vehicle models.
Sulfur oxide Sulfur oxide emissions are dependent on the sulfur content in the fuel. Currently only a sulfur content of 10 mg/kg is permitted in Europe so that sulfur oxide emissions are of secondary importance.
reduce the nitrogen oxide emissions while simultaneously oxidizing HC and CO molecules .
0.6 0.8 1.0 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 Air/fuel ratio l 4 3 2 Emission UMM0669 1E
control. In the part load range this causes induction throttling, which is detrimental to the overall efficiency. The cause of this is the work done during induction and emission of the gas, the share of which must be subtracted from the energy generated in the combustion process. This disadvantage can be partially compensated for by varying the valve timing. Advanced or retarded "intake closes", reduced valve lift or retarded "exhaust closes", in which hot exhaust gas is additionally inducted, are typical measures. Alternatively, external exhaust gas can be recirculated .
In engines with stratified charge the injected fuel mass is adjusted by the load in unthrottled operation at part load. This is known as quality control. The transition between stratifiedand homogeneous charge operation in the mid load range requires control engineering complexity and expenditure.
In the Miller process the intake valve is closed at a very advanced stage. In this way, the throttle valve can remain open and the throttling losses are lower .
TDC Top dead center, BDC Bottom dead center, IV Intake valve, EV Exhaust valve, IO Intake opens, IC N Intake closes , A High pressure loop, B Charge cycle loop.
Diesel engine: A significant characteristic feature of diesel engines is the absence of external ignition. This is achieved by injecting the ignitable fuels into highly compressed and therefore hot air. High final compression temperatures and pressures to levels in excess of 600 degC and 100 bar in turbocharged engines provide for extremely stable engine operation. Fuel spray formation, fuel vaporization, fuel mixing, and subsequent combustion can take place within a very short period of time.
Mixture formation Mixture formation is dominated by the interaction of the injection spray with the flow field in the combustion chamber. Here, the challenge consists in quickly injecting and preparing relative large masses of fuel of up to 200 mg per liter displacement. A typical injection duration is in the range of 1 ms. The term used in relation to the fuel mass flow into the combustion chamber is the injection rate . This fuel mass flow is typically injected by multihole injection nozzles.
A combination of between four and ten injection holes with a diameter of between 120 and 150 um is commonly used. As well as the small hole diameter, the high injection pressure of over 2000 bar encourages fast fuel injection and mixture formation.
flows. An additional contribution can be : made by compression induced air flows from the outer to the inner area of the combustion chamber or by the combustion chamber design, e.g. by vaporization inducing contact with the hot piston recess area.
Combustion in diesel engines Combustion in diesel engines differs from conventional gasoline engine operation in the compression ignition behavior. In all, diesel engine combustion can always be described in three consecutive processes: ignition lag, premixed combustion, and mixture controlled combustion. Depending on the operating state and the map range, the three processes have different time components .
Ignition lag Ignition lag Ignition lag refers to the period of time between start of injection and start of combustion. It is crucially dependent on the cylinder temperature, the cylinder pressure, and the combustibility of the fuel. Both mixture formation and the first chemical pre reactions of the air/fuel mixture take place in the ignition lag phase. The ignition lag is long during cold engine operation or when a low quality fuel with a low cetane number is used. The influence of cylinder pressure is less dominant than that of temperature. Basically, however, an increase in cylinder pressure reduces the ignition lag. The fuel injected during the ignition lag phase does not burn yet. The ignition lag can be between 0.1 ms in the rated output range to over 10 ms in the cold start range.
formation in diesel engines a) Characteristic spray penetration behavior, b) Typical injection spray formation Velocity profile of injection spray. Penetration X Time t After spray break up: interaction of individual fuel droplets Spray penetration X Diffusion of air Position of injection hole Diffusion of air 0 c b a Distance from spray axis Speed Ignition zones Isoline of gaseous fuel concentration UMM0670 2E
is premixed in combusted form. This fuel : mass can perfectly well be over 20 mg per liter displacement. Combustion typically starts at the edge of the fuel spray, where the fuel has mixed very well with air and therefore optimum ignition conditions are present in terms of temperature and excess air factor l. The exothermic reaction results in a local temperature increase with temperatures above 2300 K, which quickly converts the as yet non combusted premixed fuel in a chain reaction. Here, the chemical reactions that take place determine the rate of combustion. The self accelerating chain reaction results in an extremely fast combustion with large pressure increase gradients. For this reason, the premixed converted fuel mass must be kept to a minimum in diesel engines. This is typically achieved by means of a pilot injection whose local combustion exerts an initial temperature increase with a reducing effect on the ignition lag of the subsequent main injection. Mixture controlled combustion Mixture controlled combustion The amount of premixed converted fuel can be between less than 1 % in the upper full load range and 100 % in the lowest part load range. The remaining amount burns in a mixture controlled combustion. In contrast to premixed combustion, in the case of mixture controlled combustion also called diffusion combustion the transfer of oxygen into the combustion zone defines the conversion rate. It is difficult to distinguish between a combusted zone and a non combusted zone, because there is no precisely defined flame front. Basically, the diffusion flame establishes itself at the edge of the spray and burns in a limited range at 0.8 < l < 1.4. As the boundary conditions change .
a) Substance concentrations and temperature distribution, b) Formation of pollutants inside the injected spray. Temperature Soot formation Rich Lean a b Direction y formation Soot Location along direction y O2 2 H O, 2 CO x NO Combustion zone Substance concentrations and temperature Fuel UMM0673 2E
as increasing the injection pressure, in : creasing the hole diameter or the number of holes is also conceivable. However, an increase in the injection rate results for the most part in a local over enrichment with a negative impact on fuel conversion.
Particular characteristics of dieselengine combustion Cold start processes Cold start processes Cold start processes in diesel engines pose a particular challenge, particularly at outside temperatures below 10 degC. At starter speeds down to below 100 rpm a large proportion of the cylinder charge escapes through the piston rings during the relatively slow compression phase. In addition, the cold cylinder temperatures give rise to increased wall heat losses. Results experienced are low peak pressures below 30 bar and, depending on the outside temperature, low peak temperatures below 400 degC.
Fuel vaporization at top dead center Fuel vaporization at top dead center Fuel vaporization at top dead center causes further cooling. The outcome is very long ignition lags. In an extreme case scenario there may be no ignition whatsoever with the result that fuel can accumulate in the cylinder on the cylinder wall and piston over several working cycles. Its ignition after a few working cycles can, on account of the fuel mass accumulated in the meantime, result in very high peak pressures above 150 bar.
Friction losses Friction losses Because the cold start phase does not provide for enough time for an adequate hydrodynamic lubricating film to be built up at the appropriate bearing points of the crankshaft drive, the result is a negative effect on the mechanical engine systems. Typical measures to help improve the cold start process include therefore preheating the intake air, the oil or the water. The latter, as well as influencing the combustion chamber temperature, above all brings about lower engine friction and increased starter speeds.
Height dependence Height dependence A further phenomenon is encountered during operation at very hot outside temperatures or at high altitudes above 1000 m. Because the air has a lower density, its mass in the cylinder is reduced. The effect on combustion is initially not decisive. However, the exhaust gas temperature rises as a result of the lower amount of excess air.
This phenomenon is also encountered with turbocharged engines. A power reduction above all during operation at altitude can therefore be a necessary application measure.
Deposits in the injection nozzles Deposits in the injection nozzles A power drop in the order of 1 to 3 % is often observed in diesel engines after a break in period. This is caused by the fuel injection system. Deposits in the injection nozzles cause a slightly reduced nozzle hole diameter, resulting in a smaller mass flow and thus a power loss. These deposits may be caused, for example, by copper, zinc or oil contaminants in the diesel fuel.
A Decrease in soot and NOx as a result of:  exhaust gas recirculation and injection pressure increase, partial homogenization, H2O injection.
B Increase in soot and decrease in NOx  as a result of:  ignition retard, injectionpressure reduction, reduction of O2 concentration, Miller process.
C Decrease in soot and increase in NOx  as a result of:  ignition advance, injection pressure increase, increase in O2 concentration. Soot emission NO A B C x emission 1 2 UMM0674 1E
pollutant reduction inside the engine plays a much more important role in diesel engines. In addition to the emissions familiar from gasoline engines, i.e. CO2, H2O, NOx, HC and CO, soot and particulate emissions must also be taken into consideration.
Pollutants Pollutants Nitrogen oxides Measures which lower the combustion temperatures are useful in reducing the nitrogen oxides. This can be done effectively by reducing the oxygen concentration in the combustion zone. The combustion temperatures can also be reduced very easily by retarding injection or reducing the injection pressure.
Temperature reducing measures such as exhaust gas recirculation, Miller processes for soot reduction.
Soot and particulates Reducing the injection pressure or the oxygen concentration typically causes an increase in soot emissions. The formation of soot is a complex process and is dependent on both fluid dynamic and thermodynamic boundary conditions. Initially, the locally highly rich zones produce considerable amounts of soot, which are then however substantially reduced by over 70 % in the subsequent combustion by oxidation processes. A high turbulence level, which encourages the soot to oxidize in the expansion phase, is crucially important. But the temperature level too is important. On account of important local interactions between the injection spray, the combustion zone, the non combusted mixture and the recess geometry, how the combustion process is fashioned has a decisive impact on the production of emissions.
A distinction is made between soot and particulate emissions in this context. Soot consists of pure carbon compounds, whereas particulates also include fuel or lube oil droplets, ash, rubbed off metal, corrosion products, and sulfate compounds.
HC and CO compounds HC and CO compounds are typically uncritical in diesel engine emissions. The effect of hydrocarbons on particulate emissions must be taken into consideration. HC and CO increase in concentration in particular during a highly retarded combustion with incomplete burn behavior.
Mixed forms and alternative : operating strategies The classic diesel engine operating strategy is characterized by one or more injections in the TDC range. Established gasoline engine combustion processes are characterized by homogeneous or partially homogeneous operation. However, alternative forms of process control, which sometimes cannot be clearly assigned to the diesel engine or the gasoline engine process, are currently being developed.
Homogeneous charge compression ignition in diesel operation With the HCCI combustion process , to achieve homogenization, significant leaning and therefore a NOx reduction. Reliable ignition nevertheless takes place on account of the high diesel engine compression temperature. The compression ratio must be lowered to 14 to 16 in order to maintain control of the combustion process. Exhaust gas recirculation is typically used to enable the temperature level in the cylinder to be increased at low loads. Nevertheless, obtaining this over the entire program map, particularly in the full load range, is very demanding, since the pressure increase gradients become extremely high and control of transient engine operation is highly complex in view of all the engine states that arise.
Compression ignition in gasoline operation Gasoline engine combustion processes have been further developed along similar lines to diesel engine HCCI operation in order to achieve in the part load range dethrottled lean burn operation with corresponding fuel consumption advantages over conventional, stoichiometrically operated engines. The disadvantages of lean burn operation with regard to conversion in the catalytic converter are compensated by extremely low untreated NOx emissions caused by leaning. Reliable ignition of the in itself hardly combustible mixture is achieved by a high compression ratio above 13. Optimally the compression ratio is variable and can be further decreased up to full load on account of the increased combustion chamber temperatures.
Gasoline engine stratified charge Direct injection, stratified charge gasoline engine combustion processes share much in common in terms of combustion with classic diesel engine operation and therefore represent a mixed form of conventional gasoline engine and diesel engine combustion. Combustion processes of this type are becoming increasingly established thanks to their efficiency advantages by dethrottling in part load operation.
Multifuel engines Multifuel engines, which are characterized by compatibility with regard to the fuel used , no longer play a role today since the emission requirements for such engine concepts are no longer feasible.
fresh charge mz actually present or remaining in the cylinder. The difference between this and the total charge transfer mg consists in the proportion of gas that flows directly into the exhaust tract in the overlap phase, making it unavailable for subsequent combustion.
indicates the volume of the fresh charge mz relative to the existing total charge, consisting of the fresh charge and the residual gas mr. Here, the parameter mr indicates the amount of residual gas from earlier working cycles remaining in the cylinder after the exhaust process.
In a 2 stroke cycle, the gas is exchanged with every rotation of the crankshaft at the end of the expansion in the area around bottom dead center. In a 4 stroke cycle, separate intake and exhaust strokes provide a supplementary gas exchange cycle.
4 stroke cycle Valve timing and thus gas exchange are regulated by a control shaft , the exhaust valve opens and approx. 50 % of the combustion gases leave the combustion chamber under a supercritical pressure ratio during this predischarge phase. As it moves upward during the exhaust stroke, the piston sweeps nearly all of the combustion gases from the combustion chamber.
gas exchange process in the pV diagram I Intake, E Exhaust, BDC Bottom dead center, TDC Top dead center, IC Intake closes, IO Intake opens, EC Exhaust closes, EO Exhaust opens, Vc Compression volume, Vh Displacement. The arrows indicate the direction of the curves.
exchange TDC, the exhaust valve closes : and, with the intake valve still open, the piston draws in fresh air on its downward stroke. This stroke of the gas exchange process, the induction cycle, is completed shortly after bottom dead center .
On throttle controlled gasoline engines during the valve overlap period, exhaust gases flow directly from the combustion chamber into the intake passage, or from the exhaust passage back into the combustion chamber and from there into the intake passage. This internal exhaust gas recirculation increases the combustionchamber charge temperature and the proportion of inert gas in the cylinder. A consequence of this is non optimum power utilization in the upper load range. With fixed valve timing it is important to maintain a compromise, which is dependent above all in gasoline engine applications on matching the engine operating strategy with the turbocharging unit.
Early exhaust valve timing allows sufficient time for the cylinder charge to escape, and thus guarantees low residualgas compression as the piston sweeps through its upward stroke, although at the price of a reduction in the work index for the combustion gases.
The "intake valve closes" position exercises a decisive effect on the relationship between volumetric efficiency and engine speed. The maximum volumetric efficiency is achieved at low engine speeds when the intake valve closes early, and at high engine speeds when it closes late.
Obviously, fixed valve timing will always represent a compromise between two different design objectives: maximum brake mean effective pressure and thus torque at the most desirable points on the curve, and the highest possible peak output. The higher the engine speed at which maximum power occurs, and the wider the range of engine operating speeds, the less satisfactory will be the ultimate compromise. This tendency cannot be neutralized either by multi valve cylinder heads with a larger intake flow cross sectional area.
At the same time, the demands for minimum exhaust emissions and maximum fuel economy mean that low idle speeds and high low end torque are becoming increasingly important. These imperatives lead to the application of variable valve timing.
The advantages of the 4 stroke process are very good volumetric efficiency over the entire engine speed range, low sensitivity to pressure losses in the exhaust system, and relatively good control of the speed sensitive air expenditure through selection of appropriate valve timing and intake system designs.
The disadvantages of the 4 stroke process are the high complexity of valve timing and the reduced power density of non turbocharged 4 stroke engines because only every second crankshaft revolution is used for power output by combustion.
E Exhaust, I Intake, EO Exhaust opens, EC Exhaust closes,  IO Intake opens, IC Intake closes,  TDC Top dead center,  OTDC Overlap TDC, ITDC Ignition TDC,  BDC Bottom dead center, IP Ignition point.
As the two stroke process lacks separate intake and exhaust strokes, the cylinder must be filled and scavenged using positive pressure, necessitating the use of scavenging pumps. In an especially simple and very frequently used design, the bottom surface of the piston works in conjunction with a crankcase featuring a minimal dead volume to form a scavenging pump. Figure 4 shows a 2 stroke engine with crankcase scavenging and precompression along with the associated control processes. The processes which take place on the scavenging pump side are shown in the inner circle, while those occurring on the cylinder side are shown in the outer circle. The location of the intake and exhaust ports with the aim of maximum volumetric efficiency is also crucially dependent on the piston position. A hump shaped increase in piston height can reduce direct throughflow from the intake area to the exhaust area.
The advantages of the 2 stroke process are high power output referred to engine weight and engine volume and a more uniform torque generation .
The disadvantages of the 2 stroke process are higher fuel consumption, lower mean pressures , demanding mixture control, and higher HC emissions due to problematic cylinder scavenging. Two stroke processes are no longer important due to the introduction of strict emission limits for most mobile applications.
with crankcase precompression E Exhaust, I Intake, EO Exhaust opens, EC Exhaust closes,  IO Intake opens, IC Intake closes,  T Transfer passage, TO Transfer passage opens,  TC Transfer passage closes,  TDC Top dead center, BDC Bottom dead center, IP Ignition point. Volume V Pressure p Vc Vf Vs Vh p0 Intake and exhaust ports I n d u c ti o n 5 5..
6 0 deg E x h a u s t Tr a n s f e r P r e i n d u c ti o n T D C C o m b u st io n C o m pr e s si o n P r e c o m p r e s si o n 5 5deg 5 5deg 60... 65 deg 60... 6 5 deg 0... 4 0 deg IP IO TC TO BDC EC EO IC E I T UMM0449 3E UMM0451 1E
Variable valve timing: Variable valve timing in a number of design variations is gaining acceptance with different objectives. The motivations behind the use of variable valve timing are as follows: increased power and torque, dethrottling, control of the residual exhaust gas content, cylinder shutoff, charge movement, cold starting and cold running performance, control engineering optimization  , influencing the rotational speed of the exhaust gas turbocharger, and exhaust gas temperature management measures.
Today, different systems are used to provide variable valve timing. There are different motivations behind variable valve timing, depending on the combustion process and engine concept . Camshaft adjustment The concept of adjusting the intake and exhaust camshafts is increasingly becoming an accepted measure, offering a valuable degree of variability in the entire program map. This concept provides the option of adjusting the phase of the camshafts with respect to the crankshaft and thereby shifting the valve timing while maintaining the same form of opening. Electric or electrohydraulic activation of the camshaft adjuster is the state of theart technology used.
In homogeneously operated gasoline engines the intake camshaft is subject to retarded adjustment for example in the low speed and load range while at the same time the exhaust valve is subject to very advanced closing . This minimal valve overlap delivers a minimal throughflow of fresh air mixture into the exhaust area. At the same time the highly retarded opening of the intake valve also causes dethrottling by the associated retarded closing of the intake valve, because the cylinder charge is again discharged by the intake valve after bottom dead center. A rapid torque increase can be achieved for a desired load point by advancing the intake camshaft.
Exhaust camshaft adjustment also provides for further degrees of freedom.  Optimal adjustment of the intake and  exhaust camshafts is dependent on numerous factors. The operating mode is crucial as well as the position in the engine map. For example, a significant factor is whether exhaust gas turbocharging is used or whether lean burn operation  , at which a large proportion of mixture flows directly from the intake to the exhaust area. This can give rise to the beneficial effect of an increase in air mass flow by the exhaustgas turbocharger together with an advantageous increase in turbocharger speed. Rotating the intake and exhaust camshafts offers optimization opportunities for a large number of questions and is therefore being increasingly used at least in modern gasoline engines.
close to full load and a small cam and : valve lift for dethrottling for part load ranges. This is achieved for the most part by integrating a control mechanism on a rocker arm or bucket tappet, which thereby activates one or more available cams on the camshaft.
a) Conventional valve timing, b) Advanced "Intake closes",  c) Valve lift reduction and retarded "Intake closes", d) Retarded "Exhaust closes",  e) Retarded "Exhaust closes" and advanced "Intake closes",  f) Retarded "Exhaust closes" and retarded "Intake closes". BDC Bottom dead center, TDC Top dead center, IO Intake opens,  EO Exhaust opens, IC Intake closes, EC Exhaust closes,  A Advance, R Retard.
Valve lift s Valve lift s Crank angle Crank angle Crank angle Volume V Volume V Volume V Crank angle Volume V EC TDC BDC AIC AIC RIO REC RIC RIO EO Pressure p Pressure p a b d e f c IC EO IO EC IC REO RIO REC RIC AIC TDC BDC RIC AIC RIO TDC BDC TDC BDC IO RIC REO Crank angle Volume V REO AIO REC AIC AIO REO AIC REC TDC BDC Crank angle Volume V REC REO REC TDC BDC REO UMM0694E
Mechanical systems Mechanical systems Mechanical, fully variable valve gear systems typically consist of a combination of an adjustment mechanism, which permits variation of the valve lift, and a camshaft phase adjuster. The key function is the provision of variable cam lift.
used to drive such arrangements. BMW Valvetronic is an example of a fully variable mechanical valve gear . Further advantages of a fully variable valve gear are the optimization of uniform charge distribution and the potential to increase charge movement by having the two  intake valves opening at different times in the lower load range thanks to slightly differently ground eccentricities.
of a mechanical fully variable valve gear  1 Guide block,  2 Center of rotation,  3 Camshaft,  4 Hydraulic valve clearance compensation,  5 Servo unit with spiral toothed gear,  6 Eccentric shaft,  7 Intermediate lever,  8 Intake valve.
of a mechanical fully variable valve gear mm 4 2 6 8 0 90deg 135deg 180deg 270deg 225deg Camshaft position Stroke Full load Idle UMM06471E SMM0648 1Y 1 2 3 5 6 4 UMM0681Y
demand of the actuators must be noted in : particular. The system, comprising valve, magnet and coil, is made to resonate in order to minimize this demand. Because of the high power demand and the complexity involved, electromagnetic valve gears have not yet made it to series production.
An alternative is presented by a system which directly actuates the gas exchange valves via a hydraulic pressure accumulator and electronically controlled hydraulic valves. Systems of this type are still in the development stage and are not yet in  series production.
Depending on the point and duration of activation, a proportion of the hydraulic fluid escapes through the hydraulic valve. Hydraulic power loss is therefore a drawback of this system.
Electropneumatic systems Electropneumatic systems Electropneumatic systems are still in the development stage. The use of such systems in large scale production is not anticipated at present. As well as exhibiting complex control characteristics, these systems above all demonstrate unfavorable pneumatic drive power. Current systems are used for research purposes. The power input of the compressed air supply must be noted and necessarily included in an efficiency balance.
systems for different applications a) Advanced closing of intake valve, b) Variable retarded closing of intake valve. b BDC BDC a Crank angle Crank angle Cam lift Cam lift 4 1 2 3 UMM0682Y UMM0683 1E
Supercharging processes: The power of an engine is proportional to its air mass flow. As this air throughput, in turn, is linearly dependent on air density, the power of an engine, given a specific displacement and engine speed, can be increased by compressing the air before it enters the cylinders, i. e. by supercharging. The supercharging ratio indicates the density rise as compared to a naturally aspirated engine.
Thermodynamically speaking, the best results would be delivered by isothermal compression, but this cannot be technically achieved. Reversibly adiabatic compression in the supercharger unit serves as the ideal comparison process for the actual sequences; in practical terms, increased density is accompanied by losses.
The extent of the supercharging ratio is limited in gasoline engines by the occurrence of knocking combustion and in  diesel engines by the maximum permissible peak pressure in the cylinder. To offset this limitation, supercharged engines usually have lower compression ratios than their naturally aspirated counterparts.
Dynamic supercharging The gas exchange processes are not only influenced by the valve timing, but also by the geometry of the intake and exhaust lines. Induced by the induction work of the piston, as the intake valve opens it initiates a suction wave in the intake manifold that reflects off the open end of the intake manifold and returns as a pressure wave to the intake valve. These pressure waves can be used to increase the air mass  intake .
Mechanical supercharging In mechanical supercharging, the supercharger is driven directly by the internalcombustion engine .
Exhaust gas turbocharging In exhaust gas turbocharging, the power for driving the charger is extracted from the engine's exhaust gas, i. e. some of the energy contained in the exhaust gas is converted into mechanical energy by an exhaust gas turbine. In this way, the process exploits some of the enthalpy that remains unused .
Exhaust gas turbochargers are usually designed to generate a high boost pressure even at low engine speeds. In other words, the turbocharger turbine is generally designed for an engine midspeed range. However, without further measures, boost pressure at the high end of the engine speed range could increase to levels that would place excessive load on the engine. The turbine is therefore equipped with a bypass valve which, from a specific operating point, diverts some of the exhaust gas mass flow past the turbine. However, the energy of this exhaust gas remains unutilized. Much more satisfactory results can be achieved with a compromise between high boost pressure in the low engine speed range and avoidance of engine overload at the high end of the engine speed range by employing a turbocharger with variable turbine geometry .
1 Naturally aspirated engine in stationary operation, 2 Turbocharged engine in stationary  operation, 3 Torque build up of a turbocharged engine in transient operation.
Special forms of supercharging: In electrically assisted exhaust gas turbocharging systems, an additional electric motor serves to maintain the turbocharger at a high speed in the absence of exhaustgas mass flow. The produces benefits above all in transient vehicle operation and at low engine speeds, but the complexity and the electric power consumption are very high. The drawbacks of the exhaust gas turbocharger due to inertia can be reduced with electrically assisted exhaust gas turbocharging.
A special but only theoretical form of supercharging is pressure wave supercharging . The chief advantage is the transient response, which facilitates a very rapid torque buildup. However, the costs involved with pressure wave superchargers are high and the required drive necessitates additional packaging measures.
Volumetric flow map A clear illustration of the relationship between the engine and the supercharger is provided by the diagram for pressure vs. volumetric flow , in which the pressure ratio pc of the supercharger is plotted against volumetric flow V.
Only superchargers whose delivery rates vary linearly with their rotational speeds are suitable for vehicle engines. These are positive displacement superchargers of piston or rotating vane design or Roots blowers. Mechanically driven hydrokinetic flow compressors are not suitable.
Exhaust gas recirculation : Operating principle With exhaust gas recirculation  hot exhaust gas is removed, cooled in an  exhaust gas cooler, mixed with fresh air, and returned to the combustion chamber. The exhaust gas recirculation rate is adjusted by a valve. It is used in diesel engines and also increasingly in gasoline engines. Exhaust gas recirculation  Exhaust gas recirculation  in diesel engines in diesel engines In diesel engines the untreated emissions of NOx are reduced significantly by exhaust gas recirculation. Essentially this is done by lowering the peak temperature in the cylinder, which is obtained by the fact that the on the one hand the recirculated exhaust gas reduces the combustion velocity and on the other hand the exhaust gas on account of its now higher heat capacity above all of the CO2 for the same supplied energy does not become as hot as exhaust gas without exhaustgas recirculation.
Exhaust gas recirculation  Exhaust gas recirculation  in gasoline engines in gasoline engines In gasoline engines the idea is not to reduce the nitrogen oxides. The aim is primarily to reduce the exhaust gas temperature to protect components . This is very effective particularly in engine full load operation because the otherwise usual process of enriching the air/fuel mixture to reduce the exhaust gas temperature can be partially or completely dispensed with. This results in a dramatic improvement in fuel consumption.
An additional consideration in gasoline engines the possibility of diluting the charge by means of exhaust gas recirculation without compromising the function of the three way catalytic converter. Engine dethrottling can be achieved by increasing the EGR rate particularly in engine part load operation, which also results in improved fuel efficiency.
Exhaust gas recirculation variants Essentially, one of two variants high pressure and low pressure recirculation  is used, depending on whether the exhaust gas cooler is located upstream or downstream of the turbocharger. Whereas high pressure recirculation is found primarily in commercial vehicles, both variants are used in passenger cars.
High pressure EGR High pressure EGR With high pressure recirculation . High EGR rates can basically be achieved because the EGR section is short and can therefore be filled and emptied quickly. Thanks to this dynamic advantage, the EGR system can respond relatively quickly to changing operating conditions.
permeated and thus not fouled by the : exhaust gas. The performance of these components therefore remains constant over their full service lives. By contrast, significantly greater demands are placed on the EGR cooler on the high pressure side. This can be put down to the higher pressures and temperatures during operation and to the already mentioned component sooting.
Low pressure EGR Low pressure EGR This form of exhaust gas recirculation routes the exhaust gas only downstream of the turbine through the EGR cooler and mixes it with the inducted fresh air upstream of the turbocharger compressor and the soot has been removed. Thus the EGR cooler is not fouled and performs consistently over its full service life. Because of the lower temperature in this area of the exhaust system the temperature stresses in the EGR cooler are also much lower than is the case for high pressure recirculation. The lack of fouling together with a lower inlet temperature provide for a lower cooler outlet temperature than with high pressure recirculation. The reduction in NOx emissions that can thereby be achieved can be sufficient in many cases to eliminate the need for further exhaustgas treatment, such as the SCR system for example.
One drawback of low pressure recirculation is the reduced dynamic response. The system is relatively far removed from the engine and, due to the long distances involved, cannot adapt the exhaust gas recirculation rate quickly. It is necessary to set the EGR rates slightly lower than for high pressure recirculation so as to prevent the engine from being "flooded" with exhaust gas.
________________________________ References References R. Flierl; R. Hofmann; C. Landerl; T. Melcher; H. Steyer: Der neue BMWVierzylindermotor mit Valvetronic. MTZ 62 , Volume 6.
 P. Langen; R. Cosfeld; A. Grudno; K. Reif: Der Elektromechanische Ventiltrieb als Basis zukunftiger Otto motorkonzepte. 21st International Vienna Motor Symposium, Progress Reports VDI, Series 12, No. 420, Volume 2, 2000.
Crankshaft drive and crankcase The crankshaft drive comprises the following components: piston, piston rings, connecting rod, and crankshaft. What all the crankshaft drive components have in common is a translational and rotational motion. The tribological design of the crankshaft drive is already hugely significant in view of its robustness and reduced engine friction.
Piston Piston Because of the mechanical and thermal loads to which it is subjected, the piston is a highly complex component in an internal combustion engine. The recess and piston surface geometries have a crucial impact on mixture formation and combustion. In addition, the primary function of the piston is to transmit force to the connecting rod. Complex mechanical stresses occur in the process with simultaneously very high local temperatures up to and in excess of 300 degC.
The role of the piston recess is even more important in diesel engines. With the high compression ratio and a typically flat cylinder head, the entire combustion chamber must be accommodated in the piston recess. Various piston recess designs are successfully used. Figure 1 shows examples of the design variations used in diesel engines.
The piston recess decisively defines the combustion chamber shape and at the same time influences the strength of the piston crown, a factor which is vital to the function of force input into the piston pin. Especially when it comes to aluminum pistons, which are currently the preferred choice mainly for weight reasons, the requirements of high heat resistance, low weight and cylinder peak pressure call for technically sophisticated solutions.
Diesel engines can also utilize steel and even gray cast iron pistons as well as aluminum designs. Steel pistons are used in applications with peak pressures well in excess of 200 bar. An important distinguishing feature of steel is its lower heat conduction.
Modern turbocharged engines with high cylinder peak pressures and high power outputs also require a piston spray injector with an additional piston cooling duct for cooling purposes . Here engine oil is sprayed through a vertically arranged piston spray injector into the piston cooling duct. The inlet and outlets for the piston cooling duct are located on the underside of the piston.
Three rings are typically used, the top ring acting as a compression ring and the bottom ring as an oil control ring. The middle ring frequently performs both functions. Because particulate filters become clogged with ash, which is also a product of burnt oil in the combustion chamber, oil consumption and therefore the coordination of the piston ring set and honing are vitally important.
 High stress due to  thermomechanical  fatigue behavior and cold hot expansion
Figure 2: Piston shapes in various engine designs: a) Commercial vehicle aluminum diesel engine piston  with ring carrier and cooling channel, b) Commercial vehicle forged steel piston, c) Passenger car aluminum diesel engine piston  with ring carrier and cooling channel, d) Passenger car aluminum diesel engine piston  with cooled ring carrier, e) Passenger car aluminum piston  for MPI gasoline engine .
Connecting rod: Connecting rod The connecting rod . Rarely encountered is the combination of a standard connecting rod and a forked connecting rod in V engines which then permits an exactly opposed cylinder arrangement.
The length of the connecting rod is determined by the piston stroke and the counterweight radius expansion forces and a targeted weakening of the cross section at the big connecting rod eye. The big end bearing cap and the connecting rod can only be installed as a single unit.
The bolts are designed as through bolts with or without nuts. Adapter sleeves or bolt adapter collars ensure that the bearing shells are aligned when seated.
Lateral guidance of the connecting rod can be performed in the crankshaft at the big connecting rod eye or in the piston at the small connecting rod eye.
and configurations Diesel engine: 1 Keystone ring, crowned, 2 Taper face compression ring  with inside bevel, 3 Stepped compression ring, 4 Double beveled ventilated oil control ring with spiral type expander.
Gasoline engine: 5 Plain compression ring, crowned, 6 Taper face compression ring, 7 Stepped ring, 8 Double beveled ring, 9 Multipart steel oil ring.
shape is chosen for the small connecting : rod eye which ensures a high contact surface on the pin without weakening the piston. This may be trapezoidal .
The connecting rod is designed in line with the calculation of the gas and inertial forces . The loads caused by the gripping of the bearing caps must not be underestimated and ignored.
Crankshaft Crankshaft The crankshaft with its throws . V engines usually feature one crank pin for two adjacent connecting rods on one throw. This also applies to forked connecting rods, which permit two exactly opposing cylinder banks. In order to facilitate a uniform ignition interval in V6 engines with a 90deg bank angle, split pin designs which permit a 30deg offset of two crank pins in a very tight space without a main bearing in between are increasingly being used. This form of design is used even in commercial vehicle diesel engines subject to high loads.
Crankshafts are usually forged . Built up crankshafts are also used in large engines. Bores for supplying lube oil to the connecting rod bearings are incorporated in such a way as not to generate further increases in stress.
for a commercial vehicle engine 1 Front end of crankshaft, 2 Main bearing, 3 Connecting rod bearing journal  with oil bore, 4 Main web .
cally a statically overdefined system in : the simulation, however, a statically defined state which correctly describes the critical state is assumed.
Another important factor is the torsional vibrations, which, on account of the alternating forces of each individual cylinder  excite the overall crankshaftassembly system and, in view of the not inconsiderable length of the crankshaft, can approach the crankshaft's natural resonance.
The oscillatory system consisting of piston, connecting rod and crankshaft is a complex system of constantly changing torsional forces. The further the counterweights are arranged to the outside, the higher the excitation. For this reason, heavy metal counterweights are also bolted on in some cases. A simple simulation can be performed by assuming a smooth, inertialess and elastic shaft with attached equivalent masses. The oscillation equation system can then be set up with the aid of the torsion spring rate of the torque shaft. Cast shafts are ascribed a certain level of intrinsic damping. The crankshaft is thus subjected to both a  locally different and a time varying torsional load.
The torsional vibrations of the crankshaft, which are also called 2nd order torsional vibrations must be reduced by suitable vibration dampers. This is particularly necessary to protect the crankshaft against excessively high loads.
Crankcase Crankcase The crankcase supports the force transfer mechanism between cylinder head and crankshaft assembly. It bears the crankshaft assembly's support bearings, and incorporates the cylinder sleeves. Also included in the block are a separate water jacket and sealed oil chambers and galleries. Furthermore, it must absorb the torque reaction forces and provide locations for mounting many add on components.
A rigid framework like structure is normally used to absorb the forces; this structure is designed to ensure a direct, linear and bending moment free flow of force. This is usually achieved by walls with reinforcing ribs and in the case of the bolt through design by through bolts.
The cylinder head is usually bolted as a separate component in larger engines also as an individual cylinder head to the crankcase. Often four bolts per head are used, with adjacent cylinders usually sharing two bolts. Six or eight bolts may also be used in engines with high peak pressures, typically above 200 bar. The purpose of this in particular is to distribute as evenly as possible the pressure force of the cylinder head gasket.
The crankshaft bearing caps are usually bolted from underneath to the crankcase. In the bolt through design a long bolt performs this function from the head to the bearing cap. The advantage of this design is that it permits the use of hightensile steels, which can transmit tensile load better than casting materials.
in the crankshaft bearing area in order : to achieve even greater rigidity. Bolted underneath is the oil pan, which can sometimes have a similarly bracing effect. However, this only applies to cast oil pans. The piston bearing surface can be designed as a separate component . However, the piston bearing surface can also be cast into the crankcase particularly in castaluminum designs or directly as a bearing surface in gray cast iron with strip hardeners.
Today's crankcases have attained a very high level of function integration and are therefore highly complex components. Frequently the oil pump housing is also integrated in the casting, as are oil cooler functions, the coolant thermostat housing, the balancer shaft locators, and all the brackets for the accessories.
Aside from the crankshaft, the crankcase is the component which contributes most to the engine weight. Many efforts are therefore made to reduce the weight by using materials other than the customary gray cast iron. These include aluminum materials, which, because of their thermally limited service life, are primarily used in smaller engines, particularly in passenger car applications. Die casting has become an accepted cost saving process for manufacturing aluminum, while sand casting is otherwise the regular process used. An "open deck" construction is used to manufacture diecast crankcases efficiently, i. e. the joint face with the cylinder head features large pass through cross sections for the water jacket and the oil return. When cast iron materials are used, on the other hand, the upper crankcase is closed to make the structure as rigid as possible.
Efforts are also being made to manufacture crankcases from magnesium in order to further reduce weight but this comes at the expense of a high manufacturing cost. For this reason, a "hybrid" material concept is used where the bearing functions are performed by aluminum and the shielding functions by magnesium inserts. Further increases in strength are provided by other cast iron variants, compacted graphite iron spheroidal graphite instead of the customary lamellar graphite. This makes it possible to produce thinner walls and higher strength with reduced weight. The crankcase is assigned the most important function of noise emission. Because the crankcase is often joined directly to the combustion chamber, absorbs the high periodic gas and inertial forces and has a relatively large surface, it is extremely important for this surface to be rigid. The standard design methods used to provide high rigidity are ribbing and barreling, which also help to prevent a membrane effect.
Variable compression ratio Variable compression ratio A variable compression ratio is desirable both in gasoline engines to reduce the knock tendency close to full load and in diesel engines to reduce the peak pressure at full load. However, up to now no mechanical or hydraulic system has successfully managed to provide this variability in diesel engines. The reason for this is the high loads to which diesel engines are subjected on account of the higher peak pressures and higher pressure gradients compared with gasoline engines.
Cylinder head The main functions of the cylinder head are to supply the cylinder with fresh  mixture, to discharge the exhaust gas, and to absorb the cylinder pressure forces.
Cylinder head Cylinder head The cylinder head seals off the upper end of the crankcase and the cylinder barrel. It houses the gas exchange valves and the spark plugs in gasoline engines, the fuel injectors in direct injection gasoline engines, and the fuel injectors and possibly the sheathed element glow plugs in diesel engines. Together with the piston, it also provides the desired combustionchamber shape. In the vast majority of passenger car engines, the entire valve gear is also mounted in the cylinder head. The cylinder head performs a large number of functions and exhibits complex load profiles. The challenge faced here, as well as precisely controlling gas exchange and charge movement, which directly  influence engine emissions, efficiency and power output, is above all to cool the hot side of the cylinder head and maintain control over the complex mechanical and thermal loads involved.
Based on the gas exchange concepts, a distinction is made between two basic design configurations. In the counterflow cylinder head intake and exhaust passages open into the same side of the cylinder head . This limits the space available for the intake and exhaust gas passages, but due to the short flow tracts, this represents a substantial advantage in supercharged applications without intercooling. This design, with the gas supply and discharge tracts on a single side, also provides practical advantages in transverse mounted engines.
In the crossflow cylinder head intake and exhaust passages are located on opposite sides of the engine , providing a diagonal flow pattern for the intake and exhaust gases. This layout's advantages include more freedom in intake and exhaust tract design as well as less complicated sealing arrangements. Typically, vehicle specific boundary conditions are crucial to determining whether a counterflow or crossflow cylinder head is used.
This decision also determines the valve arrangement used. Counterflow applications require a twisted valve arrangement in today's typical multi valve designs. The main advantage of a twisted valve  arrangement is that it is a simple way of delivering high cylinder whirl values. A parallel valve arrangement requires greater efforts at the passage end to  deliver a high cylinder whirl . Today's passenger car applications use almost exclusively a continuous single piece cylinder head. In V engines one cylinder head per cylinder bank is used. Individual cylinder heads are frequently still used in commercial vehicle engines, which sometimes still feature a block mounted camshaft with a pushrod assembly.
The cylinder head is subject to very high loads. On the one hand, frequently varying temperatures and the accompanying expansions give rise to stresses which can only be absorbed by appropriate design measures . Thermomechanical strength is  determined by the number of cold hot load profiles.
In multi valve designs the land between the exhaust valves is subjected to particularly high temperatures. At full load slightly critical temperatures above 350 degC are reached here. Similarly high temperatures are encountered in the recess edge area . Gray cast iron designs are especially prone to the risk of hot gas corrosion, an oxidation of the surface which can culminate in component jeopardizing cracking.
The cylinder head gasket, which is located between the crankcase and the cylinder head, performs an important function. Firstly, it must seal the combustion chamber even in the case of high cylinder pressures and, secondly, it must ensure the flow of engine oil and cooling water between crankcase and cylinder head. Typically, metal materials are used to seal the combustion chamber; these metals adapt to the surface by means of plastic deformation and establish the seal through their elasticity. Elastomer gaskets or geometrically optimized metal sheet steel gaskets are used.
To provide a uniform downward pressure : on the cylinder head gasket, it is possible to increase the number of cylinder head bolts to such an extent that already commercial vehicle engines with eight bolts per cylinder head are in use.
Engines without cylinder head gaskets are the exception and require the crankcase deck and the underside of the cylinder head to be finished to very high levels of accuracy.
Valve gear Valve gear It is the function of the valve gear assembly in a 4 stroke engine to permit and to control the exchange of gases in the internal combustion engine. The valve gear includes the intake and exhaust valves, the springs which close them, the camshaft drive assembly, and the various force transfer devices . In various widely used designs, the camshaft is located in the cylinder head.
When the camshaft is installed within the block, the rocker arm is actuated not directly by the cam lobe, but by the intermediate action of a push rod and a lifter .
a) Push rod assembly, b) Single rocker arm assembly,  c) Twin rocker arm assembly, d) Overhead bucket tappet assembly. OHV Overhead valves, OHC Overhead camshaft, DOHC Double overhead camshaft.
In the case of the overhead buckettappet assembly, a "bucket" moving back and forth in the cylinder head absorbs the cam lobe's lateral force, while transferring its linear actuating pressure to the valve stem .
Valve arrangements Valve arrangements The valve control arrangement and the design of the combustion chamber are closely interrelated. Today, nearly all valve assemblies are overhead units mounted in the cylinder head. In diesels and simpler spark ignition engines designed for higher specific outputs tend to feature intake and exhaust valves which are inclined towards each other. This configuration allows larger valve diameters for a given cylinder bore, while also providing greater freedom for optimizing intake and exhaust passage design. Twin rocker arm assemblies actuated by overhead cams are used most often here. High performance and racing engines are increasingly using four valves per cylinder and overhead buckettappet valve assemblies.
The valve timing diagram for an engine shows the opening and closing times of the valves, the valve lift curve, the maximum valve lift, and the valve velocity and acceleration.
Valve, Valve, valve guide and valve guide and valve seat valve seat The materials employed in manufacturing valves are heat and scale resistant. The valve seat's contact surface is frequently hardened. Another proven method for improving the thermalconductivity characteristics of exhaust valves is to fill their stems with sodium. To extend service life and improve sealing, valve rotating systems  are also in common use.
s Valve lift, s' Valve velocity, s" Valve acceleration. IC Intake closes, IO Intake opens, EC Exhaust closes, EO Exhaust opens,  BDC Bottom dead center, TDC Top dead center. Exhaust valve Intake valve BDC TDC EC IO EO IC BDC 100 200 300 400 CA 240 120 360 480 600 CA Valve clearance Lift s 0 Speed Acceleration Crank angle s' s" s" s' UMM04851E
ductivity and good antifriction properties. : They are usually pressed into the cylinder head and are often supplemented by valve stem seals at their cold ends for reducing oil consumption.
Valve seat wear is generally reduced by making the valve seat inserts of cast or sintered materials and shrink fitting them into the cylinder head.
Cam lobe design and timing dynamics Cam lobe design and timing dynamics The cam lobe must be able to open the valve as far, as fast and as smoothly as possible. The closing force for the valves is applied by the valve springs, which are also responsible for maintaining contact between the cam lobe and the valve. Dynamic forces impose limits on cam and valve lift.
Rarely encountered are designs which use their own mechanism  to restore the valves with the advantage of increased valve velocities and thus lift curves which more closely resemble the ideal rectangular case. Conventional springs must always ensure a frictional connection between camshaft, intermediate elements and valve while adhering to the permissible surface load. A slight clearance can be encountered only when cam lift is not active. Modern engines operate here with hydraulic valve clearance compensation. Otherwise valve clearance must be regularly checked; measurements of 0.1 to 0.2 mm are common at the intake and exhaust valves.
Camshaft drive Camshaft drive To drive the valve gear, the camshaft must be connected to the crankshaft in such a way that one crankshaft revolution results in a one half camshaft revolution in a 4 stroke engine.
For passenger car applications with overhead camshaft either timing chain or toothed belt drives are used in modern engines. Both drives require a tensioning device, which acts on the free running length, the loose side, to prevent uncontrolled vibration.
In view of the fully utilized minimum space between piston and valve in modern engines, it is very important for the camshaft drive to operate safely and  reliably, because in the event of damage contact can have serious consequences for the valve gear.
For this reason, the pressure pins for the tensioning rails in a chain drive or the toothed belt are wearing parts which must be replaced on a regular basis. Modern duplex chains are highly durable and are only subject to minimal wear. The drawbacks of a timing chain are its need to be lubricated and its elongation during operation. Some major advantages, however, are that it cannot jump off the gear wheel and it is not subject to the risk of cracking. Transmission by gear wheels in a geartrain is typically used in commercialvehicle engines or engines with blockmounted camshafts. In engines with overhead camshafts in particular, this is a very expensive solution, but one which provides for extending engine running times on account of the reliable transmission. Expensive vertical shafts, whose axes run at right angles to the crankshaft and camshaft, are rarely used.
Oil supply: As well as lubricating the tribologically critical pairings of the crankshaft drive, the cylinder head and other components, the oil supply serves to remove local contaminants, combustion residues and wear particles which are filtered out in the oil filter unit. Additional functions include the dissipation of heat in areas subject to thermal load, such as the friction bearings in the crankshaft drive or for oil cooled pistons, and damping of vibrations in bearings. With the system of forced feed lubrication conventionally used . For safety reasons, the oil filter unit is often equipped with a bypass valve and a pressure valve in a full flow design. The oil cooler provided in engines subject to higher loads is cooled by either air or coolant. The engine oil flows though oil ducts and by the force of gravity back into the oil sump and into the oil pan typically located underneath the crankcase. That is why forced feed lubrication is also known as wet sump lubrication. In addition to the direct supply of oil by the oil pump, the rotational motion of the crankshaft effects a fine conditioning of the oil mist in the crankcase.
The opposite system to conventional wet sump lubrication is the more expensive dry sump lubrication, because it requires a second oil pump to remove the oil from the engine compartment  . The advantages are a constantly guaranteed lube oil supply under conditions of high lateral acceleration or inclination and freedom in deciding on where to locate the oil supply system. These give rise to lower engine heights and a possible increase in the engineoil quantity, which is beneficial to engine cooling.
Cooling In order to avoid thermal overload, combustion of the lubricating oil on the piston's sliding surface, and uncontrolled combustion due to excessive component temperatures, the components surrounding the hot combustion chamber . As water has a high specific heat  capacity and provides efficient thermal transition between the materials, most contemporary vehicle engines are watercooled. Moreover, it is possible, under very hot local boundary conditions when the cooling medium is locally evaporated, to achieve through the heat of evaporation an additional cooling effect which together with the condensation behavior in colder adjacent areas reduces unwanted high  local temperature gradients.
1 Oil reservoir, 2 Oil pump, 3 Oil cooler, 4 Filter unit, 5 Bypass valve, 6 Engine with lubrication points,  7 Second oil pump.
is forced through it by a fan. The coolant : temperature is regulated by a thermostatic valve which bypasses the radiator as required.
Air cooled concepts still play a subordinate role today. Modern emission regulations call for effective engine cooling with simultaneously high specific power output. This can practically no longer be achieved with air cooling, a system which is indeed robust and low maintenance, but is also not as effective. A crucial drawback of air cooled concepts is their acoustic performance. The cooling fins act like a resonator and therefore result in a marked increase in sound emissions.
Crankshaft vibration damper The crankshaft is subjected to high frequency vibrations , particularly in the region of resonant frequencies. Vibration dampers are therefore used to moderate dangerous crankshaft resonance phenomena.
tion system, through more sophisticated oil damped flywheel masses, in which the viscosity of the oil and friction surfaces provide the damping effect, up to complex pendulum adsorbers. The vibration damper is generally mounted at the free crankshaft end .
1st order torsional vibrations, i. e. vibrations resulting from ignition and inertial forces, which can result in excitation of transmission and input shaft vibrations, are reduced by dual mass flywheels or other damping technologies. Phenomena such as clutch grabbing, transmission chatter and starting jerks can be optimized by such vibration absorbers, since all the following components  clutch, transmission and input shafts likewise represent an oscillatory system. In a dual mass flywheel the two flywheel masses are coupled to each other by means of springs. Torsional vibration dampers are also commonly featured in clutches both components must naturally be tuned together.
with coolant circuit 1 Radiator,  2 Thermostat,  3 Water pump,  4 Water passages in cylinder block, 5 Coolant passages in cylinder head.
Reciprocating piston : engine types The internal combustion engine is characterized by its great variability and application specific adaptability. In particular, the arrangement of the individual cylinders provides for numerous variants.
Arrangements In principle, a huge number of possible cylinder arrangements is conceivable. Few of these arrangements have proven to be particularly effective for automotive applications .
It is important to note the difference between the opposed cylinder  engine and the V engine with 180deg included angle between cylinder banks. In the boxer engine the pistons always move in opposite directions, which is why the inertial forces cancel each other out. In the V engine, on the other hand, the pistons of two opposed cylinders always move in the same direction.
It is also important to note the design of  Vand W engines, in which the connecting rod/crankshaft link of associated cylinders is effected at slightly offset crank pins.
In multi piston units compression is typically generated by several working pistons. In the U engine the pistons undertake an approximately parallel motion. In the opposed piston engine the pistons undertake a typically opposed motion.  Engine variants with more than one piston per combustion chamber have not gained acceptance. Weight and engine size are not suitable for automotive applications. Definitions The following definitions in accordance with DIN 73021 ).
1 Single cylinder . 1 5 6 7 2 3 4 UMM0687Y
Numbering the cylinders Numbering the cylinders The cylinders are numbered consecutively 1, 2, 3, etc. in the order in which they would be intersected by an imaginary reference plane, as viewed looking at the end of the engine opposite the poweroutput end. This plane is located horizontally to the left when numbering begins; the numerical assignments then proceed clockwise about the longitudinal axis of the engine. If there is more than one cylinder in a reference plane, the cylinder nearest the observer is assigned the number 1, with consecutive numbers being assigned to the following cylinders. Cylinder 1 is to be identified by the number 1.
Firing sequence Firing sequence The firing sequence is the sequence in which combustion is initiated in the cylinders. Engine design configuration, uniformity in ignition intervals, ease of crankshaft manufacture, optimal crankshaft load patterns, etc. all play a role in defining the firing sequence.
__ l   An offset of the piston pin is performed by some manufacturers. Noise and friction advantages can be expected on account of the changing piston location and depending on the position of the connecting rod. The offset can be effected either in the piston by shifting the piston pin from the center position or by offsetting the crankshaft.
shown on a basic crankshaft drive FG Piston pin force , FS Connecting rod force, FR Radial force, FN Piston normal force,  FT Tangential force.
a Crankshaft position,  b Connecting rod pivoting angle, r Crank radius,  l Connecting rod  length,  h Piston stroke, x Piston travel .
fluence of the stroke/connecting rod ratio and the offset. However, the differences with normal offset values in the millimeter range are clearly smaller.
This expression shows that there are higher harmonics on account of the crankshaft drive kinematics, and these are also called engine orders .
Crankshaft assembly kinetics The forces acting on the crankshaft assembly and the resulting moments can initially be derived without inertial forces as follows .
This force contributes significantly to the friction of the piston on the cylinder barrel. The side which is touched by the piston after top dead center on account of the combustion pressure is termed the major thrust face, the opposite side the minor thrust face. The greatest friction is therefore created shortly after TDC on the major thrust face.
The tangential force at the crankshaft : crank pin contributes to an acceleration of the crankshaft and thus to the build up of torque at the crankshaft. It is created from the vectorial analysis of the connectingrod force.
The inertial forces can be split into oscillating and rotating components. The piston, piston ring and piston pin weights mK belong to the oscillating component and can be punctually assigned to the piston pin.
____  r , where mi is the respective mass component of web, pin, etc. and rsi is the corresponding center of mass radius.
Because of the connecting rod's swinging motion, it is useful to split the connecting rod mass into an oscillating component and a rotating component.
The rotating inertial force likewise increases with the square of the speed, but has not higher orders. The rotating inertial force can therefore be easily balanced by counterweights which rotate at engine speed. The rotational irregularities of the crankshaft are so small compared with these forces that they can be ignored in the balancing of masses.
As shown in the crankshaft assembly kinematics, higher harmonics higher engine orders occur on account of the crankshaft drive geometry. Aside from the 1st and 2nd engine orders, however, the amount of the 4th order and the higher components decreases rapidly, and is generally ignored for a balancing of masses.
Balancing of masses  in a single cylinder engine The component of rotating masses in a single cylinder engine can be fully  balanced by appropriate counterweights on the crank pin. Weights are normally provided for on both sides and the weights must be balanced merely with the centerof mass radius. The oscillating forces can be represented with force vectors when they are modeled rotating in the opposite direction in each case with half the amount.
Therefore two contra rotating shafts with : weights can be used to balance the oscillating inertial forces. The horizontal component then cancels out and at least the first order of the oscillating inertial force component can be compensated.
A virtually full balancing of masses  requires further balancer shafts, which must rotate at twice the engine speed in order to balance completely the secondorder component of the oscillating mass component.
Counterweights Vector diagrams of the oscillating inertial forces 1st order 2nd order mo. r.  2. cos mo. r.  2. A2    . cos 2.
The 2nd order star diagram for the fourcylinder in line engine is asymmetrical, meaning that this order is characterized by free inertial forces. These forces can be balanced using two countershafts rotating in opposite directions at double the rate of the crankshaft .
free inertial forces in multiple cylinder engines Forces  and  moments  at the  engine Desig nation Oscillating torque, transverse tilting moment, reaction torque Free inertial force Free inertial moment, longitudinal tilting moment about the y axis  z y x z y x z y x z y x UMM0469Y
absorbed by the components, especially : the crankshaft and crankcase, while the external effects act via the engine bearings on the support structure and impart oscillations to the chassis or engine foundation.
If the periodic gas force acting on the piston and the periodic mass inertial forces acting on the piston, connecting rod and crankshaft assembly are grouped together, they generate a sum of tangential force components at the crankshaft journal. When multiplied by the crank radius, this produces a periodically variable torque value.
3 * F2 * a 240deg/240deg 4 cylinder 4 cylinder In line, 4 throws 0 4 * F2 0 0 180deg/180deg Opposed cylinder , 4 throws 0 0 0 2 * F2 * b 180deg/180deg 5 cylinder In line, 5 throws 0 0 0.449 * F1 * a 4.98 * F2 * a 144deg/144deg 6 cylinder In line, 6 throws 0 0 0 0 120deg/120deg 1 Without counterweights.
0 90deg/90deg 12 cylinder 12 cylinder V 60deg, 6 throws VM384 11 0 0 0 0 60deg/60deg 1 Without counterweights, 2 Can be completely balanced by using counterweights.
Tribology and friction: The piston with piston rings and bearing surface is a self contained and highly complex tribological system. This also applies to the piston pin and the crankshaft friction bearings. Detailed simulation formulations are necessary in view of the periodically changing application of force both in terms of amount and direction. To be able to ensure wear resistance, it is necessary to build up a hydrodynamic lubricating film which is higher than the surface roughness of the two contact surfaces , and for the piston pin between these positions. It is therefore also important to ensure that a sufficient oil retaining volume can be maintained in the contact surfaces in order to retain by forces of adhesion in the short time of standstill as much oil as to avoid seizing or minimize increased wear. In the tribological system for the piston this is bearing surface honing, and for the piston pin shaping of the piston pin bearing.
Traced back to Newton is the formulation to the effect that the friction between two adjacent oil elements is virtually independent of the prevailing pressure and only proportional to the change in speed from one element to the next.
The dynamic viscosity e  decreases sharply with temperature. It is important to see to it that the oil temperature ensures a viscosity e which facilitates sufficient shear stress to build up a supporting oil film. It is also necessary to provide for a sufficiently high relative speed u on the part of the contact surfaces. It can be recognized from the formula that  hydrodynamic shear stress collapses when the speed assumes a value of zero . If can further be recognized that the lubricating film y must not become too large, as otherwise the shear stress will become too small and the lubricating film will break.
on the one hand that the pressure loss of a flow is dependent on the viscosity and the speed. In addition, the speed profile can thus be derived.
On account of the adhesion condition : which states that the speed of the oil on the wall is identical to the wall speed, a speed distribution .
It is attempted with the aid of to determine the lubricating film thickness by solving the mathematical equations in the multidimensional case for mass balance and momentum equilibrium.
forces from direct stress .
The equation system is established as a Reynolds differential equation or a NavierStokes equation to solve the flow problem. By using a finite element simulation, the bearing deformations are added and the highly complex equations . This is achieved by means of pressure oil bores and special grooves in friction bearings or by means of initial forces at the piston rings.
Attempts have also been made in the meantime to simulate the case of mixed friction. The influence of surface fine geometry is taken into account in an extended Reynolds differential equation. By using contact pressure models of rough surfaces, it is possible to determine, as well as the hydrodynamic contact area ratios, the solid contact area ratio and to take this into account accordingly. Intensive work is being conducted on models to determine the running in behavior of contact surfaces. This will finally enable the wear behavior to be assessed.
Because the shear stresses and thus also the frictional forces are proportional to the speed, the share of friction of the piston assembly at the dead centers and that of the piston pin bearing is small. Instead, the wear parameters are decisive here.
Sliding bearings The bearings most commonly encountered in an internal combustion engine are friction .
It is important to ensure that the seating pressure is precisely configured in both split bearings so as to prevent them from jamming and rotating also at higher temperatures or under emergency lubrication conditions. However, material overloading must also be reliably prevented.
The lubricating gap of the crankshaft main bearings changes in response to the constantly varying bearing forces . This generates a kind of pumping effect and the oil in the bearing is constantly replaced.
The swinging motion of the connecting rod effects an increased relative speed when the piston travels up the cylinder and a reduced relative speed when the piston travels down the cylinder in the  lubricating gap of the big end bearing or crank pin. This alone causes oil to be pumped into the oil gap. Furthermore, naturally periodic forces acting on the bearing cause the connecting rod to change position constantly and thereby assist the build up of lubricating film  pressure.
The small end bearing is merely subject to a swinging motion. A supply of oil is therefore particularly important, but difficult to achieve. In practical terms, mixed friction cannot be avoided. If the arrangement involves a floating pin bearing , the pin performs a slight rotary motion in the
Oil is generally supplied as splash oil, and partly also via a specific locating bore or via a pressure oil supply from the crankshaft through grooves in the crankshaft journal bearing and a vertical bore in the connecting rod.
By slightly angling the roller in relation to the cam or by offsetting the stroke function, it is possible to ensure that an oil wedge can be built up and the roller rotates continuously. Pitting is a typical  indicator of overloading in rolling pairs that are subject to high loads. It results from molecular deformations of the metal and possible embedding of oil, which gives rise to extremely high local pressures and plastic deformations or material erosion. Harder materials and decreasing the load reduce the tendency to pitting.
Piston ring and bearing surface The piston rings together with the bearing surface constitute a complex tribological system. On the one hand, the pressure force of the piston ring is very much dependent on the cylinder pressure and thus on the crank angle and the power stroke. On the other hand, the piston rings make axial secondary movements in their grooves which also have a significant  impact on the lubricating film thickness. The oil is generally applied as splash oil to the bearing surface .
values are used to characterize honing; : these values are standardized on a generic level in DIN 4760 or DIN EN ISO 13565 for an explanation) is decisive but the value is swiftly and drastically minimized after run in reduce the amount of oil forced out, but there is a tendency to seizing on account of the unsatisfactory axial oil distribution. Steep honing angles result in increased oil consumption. Honing angles between 30deg and 90deg are customary.
Mixed friction occurs at any rate at the piston reversal points. The least that is required in this area is micro pockets of oil, which can be produced for example by laser honing or by bringing out amounts of alloy during the honing procedure.
Usually, such high temperatures are generated during the combustion stroke of a piston engine that much of the bearing surface oil vaporizes or in diesel engines even burns off. This vaporized oil constitutes the majority of the oil consumption by modern day internal combustion engines.
The special shape of the piston rings is designed to facilitate the build up of an oil wedge. A critical factor is, on the one hand, the piston speed, which must not be allowed to become too high, as otherwise the shear forces can no longer be absorbed by the oil and the oil film will break. On the other hand, the reversal points, particularly at top dead center, must be classed as critical with regard to wear.
The specific consumptions rise from straight lines 1 through 9. In other words, for the first process 200 g of fuel are needed to obtain 1 kWh of energy. For 9, 500 g of fuel already are expended for 1 kWh.
The y axis is normalized to the working cycle and the displacement  to generate the same amount of mechanical energy. This is also discernible from the gradient of the straight line.
comparison of gasoline and diesel engines. What is noticeable at the outset is the large differences in rpm between gasoline and diesel engines. The compression ratios too are by the nature of the process much higher for diesel engines than for gasoline engines. Due to the higher compression pressure, greater mean pressures pme are possible. Since diesel engines attain lower speeds . Due to the lower compression ratio, gasoline engines have an unfavorable specific consumption.
1 200 g/kWh,  2 220 g/kWh,  3 240 g/kWh, 4 260 g/kWh  5 280 g/kWh,  6 300 g/kWh, 7 350 g/kWh,  8 400 g/kWh,  9 500 g/kWh.
UMM0693E 20 15 10 5 1 2 3 4 6 7 5 8 9 0 0 bar 60 30 90 120 150 180 mg/working cycle/l displacement Mean pressure pme Fuel consumption
mean  pressure  pme  bar Power  output  per liter  kW/l Weight to power ratio kg/kW Specific fuel consumption g/kWh Torque  increase % Gasoline engines Motorcycles 4 stroke 5000...13000 9...12 9...13 50...150 2.5...0.5 230...280 10...15 Pass.
a) Diesel engine with exhaust gas turbocharging, b) Gasoline engine . nL Idle speed, nMd,max Engine speed at Md,max, nnom Nominal speed, nmax Maximum engine speed, Dn Useful speed range, Pnom Rated power, Md,max Maximum torque. nMd,max nMd,max nnom nnom Pnom Pnom D n D n Speed n Speed n P D Md D Md Power P, torque Md Power P, torque Md Md Md nL nL P a b nmax Md,max nmax Md,max UMM0489 4E
Torque increase Torque increase The torque increase is the gradient of the torque curve between maximum torque and the torque at rated power.
Effect of atmospheric conditions The quantity of air which an engine draws in, or is inputted to the engine by supercharging, depends upon ambient air density; colder, heavier, denser air increases engine output. As a rule of thumb: Engine power drops by approximately 1 % for each 100 m rise in elevation. Depending upon engine design, the cold intake air is normally heated to some degree while traversing the intake passages, thereby reducing its density and thus the engine's ultimate output. Humid air contains less oxygen than dry air and therefore produces lower engine power outputs. The decrease is generally modest to the point of insignificance. The warm humidity of air in tropical regions can however result in a noticeable engine power loss.
Definitions of power Definitions of power The effective power is the engine's power as measured at the crankshaft or ancillary mechanism at the specified engine speed. When measurements are made downstream from the transmission, the transmission losses must be factored into the equation.
range and torque position Engine type Useful speed range D nN Torque  position  Diesel  engine Pass.
Displacement Displacement The displacement also referred to as the swept volume is characterized by the total vertical stroke of the piston multiplied by the cylinder diameter. The displacement of an individual cylinder is characterized as Vh. The displacement VH of an engine corresponds to the sum total of all the displacements Vh of its cylinders. Compression volume Compression volume The compression volume Vc corresponds to the compression space in the cylinder when the piston is at TDC.
Compression ratio Compression ratio The compression ratio describes the ratio of the combustion chamber volume when the piston is at BDC to the volume when the piston is at TDC.
Piston stroke Piston stroke The piston stroke is a function of the crank angle. It is not uniform over one revolution and varies. Thus, the piston moves from TDC towards BCD up to 90deg CA after TDC much faster downwards than from 90deg to BDC. The mean piston speed is the average speed of the piston stroke over one complete revolution.
some quantities in the engine. The quantity equations are universally valid, the numerical values in the given unit are inserted in the numerical value equations. These equations tend to be applied in practice.
_ l  cos 2ph ) ak in m/s2, n in rpm, l, r and s in mm UMM0491Y l/r 3.5 4 4.5 umax 1.63 um 1.62 um 1.61 um Vc Vc Vf Ss Vh Vh Sk BDC TDC E T w BDC TDC r BDC TDC r l w
Displacement and compression space : Displacement and compression space In Figure 3 the displacement is plotted on the x axis and the compression space is plotted on the y axis. The straight lines show lines with a constant compression ratio. As the displacement increases, so too the compression space increases. If the compression ratio is raised, the compression space must become smaller for the same displacement.
Determining the : Determining the piston clearance piston clearance Example For a stroke of 140 mm the piston clearance from top dead center at 45 degCA is 25 mm .
Determining the : Determining the piston speed piston speed The x axis in Figure 5 shows the stroke in millimeters. The left y axis shows the mean and the right y axis the maximum piston speed. In addition, lines of constant speed are marked. It can clearly be seen that both piston speeds increase as the stroke increases. The same applies to increasing speeds.
tio increases, depending on how strongly the air is heated and cooled in the intercooler, the density of the gas increases. The hotter the gas after the intercooler, the smaller the density increase.
temperature and on the y axis the final compression temperature. In addition, lines of a constant compression ratio are marked. It can be seen that the final compression temperature increases as the intake temperature increases. The same applies to increasing compression ratios, where here the straight line gradient increases with a higher compression ratio. This graphic shows why lowering the compression ratio can reduce the knock tendency.
pressure as a function of compression ratio and charge air pressure. If both increase, the final compression pressure also increases. However, a significant effect on the final compression pressure can be seen by increasing the compression ratio.
 ISO 1204: Reciprocating internal combustion engines Designation of the direction of rotation and of cylinders and valves in cylinder heads, and definition of right hand and left hand in line engines and locations on an engine.
 Council Directive 80/1269/EEC of 16 December 1980 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the engine power of motor vehicles.
Historic measures : Endeavors at controlling air pollution are an absolutely integral element of environmental protection. It successes since the mid 20th century are thanks in particular to the economic analysis of the generation of pollutants and the derived further development of the combustion process, the consistent improvement of fuel quality, and the technical development of exhaust gas treatment.
Smog and acid rain are still today common catchwords that have their origin in the second half of the 20th century. On region hugely affected by smog in that period was the US state of California. In order to reduce air pollution in areas of high population density such as Los Angeles, California had already enacted the first laws in the early 1960s . Other states followed California's example. In 1970 the European Community for its part passed its first emission regulations. These legislative measures induced automobile manufacturers to fit their motor vehicles with exhaust gas treatment systems in the markets affected. This has resulted in today's global market for exhaust gas treatment systems.
line engines with lean burn operation). Carbon dioxide is present in the air as a natural constituent and is not categorized as a pollutant in respect of exhaust gas emissions for motor vehicles. However, it is considered to be one of the causes of the greenhouse effect and the associated global climate change. Since industrialization, the CO2 content in the atmosphere has risen by roughly 40 % to today's figure of 400 ppm.
The amount of released carbon dioxide is directly proportional to fuel consumption. Measures taken to reduce fuel consumption are therefore becoming increasingly significant.
Pollutants The above mentioned constituents are the components of exhaust gas that would be produced in a complete, ideal combustion of pure fuel i.e. in the complete combustion of fuel with oxygen without unwanted secondary reactions. However, minor constituents are also produced in real vehicle operation.
Hydrocarbons Hydrocarbons Fuels that contain hydrocarbons never combust absolutely completely in engines. The incompletely combusted hydrocarbons emitted from an engine and their concentrations are determined in particular by the combustion and engine applications with injection strategy, injected fuel quantity, injection pressure, point of injection, etc., and by the air fuel ratio l, by the combustion temperature, and by further engine influencing factors. Aliphatic hydrocarbons have an unpleasant odor and form derived products when exposed to sunlight.
Carbon monoxide Carbon monoxide Carbon monoxide is formed during the incomplete combustion of fuel due to an insufficient oxygen supply. This can be caused by locally rich areas as a result of insufficient mixture preparation .
Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas. It is toxic since it binds to the hemoglobin in blood and thereby inhibits oxygen transport.
Particulates Particulates Unlike gaseous exhaust gas constituents, particulates are not a clearly defined chemical species. All solid or liquid combustion residues which can accumulate in a defined sampling process on a sample filter are called particulates. These are, aside from soot particles consisting of a solid soot core and adherent incompletely combusted hydrocarbons resulting from fuel and lube oil droplets of hydrocarbons, water and sulfurous acids  as well as ash particles and abraded metal.
Sulfur oxides Sulfur oxides The term sulfur oxides . Phenomenologically these reactions have hitherto not been explained in every detail despite broad empirical knowledge. The layout of the combustion chamber and the combustion application have a large influence, e.g. guidance of the flame front and its local temperatures.
The produced mixture of strongly oxidizing nitrogen oxides is termed "nitrous gases" and comprises nitrogen monoxide  is not strongly oxidizing and is not classified as a nitrous gas. It is a strong greenhouse gas. When it comes to the frequently used generic term NOx, it is always necessary to define whether laughing gas is included or not. Both definitions are common.
Catalytic exhaust gas treatment A catalyst is scientifically defined as a substance in the presence of which a certain reaction or a reaction sequence takes place more quickly under kinetically limited reaction conditions and which itself emerges unchanged. In other words, the catalyst reduces the activation barrier of the reaction catalyzed by it. However, the components of exhaust gas treatment systems designated in the technical sense as a catalyst furthermore perform further functions .
Catalyst components Catalysts for exhaust gas treatment consist of complex structured, highly porous ceramics which are in the main applied as coatings to honeycombed carrier structures. A distinction is made between the following catalyst components.
Catalytically active components Catalytically active components Catalytically active components absorb certain substances from the exhaust gas and store them until suitable conditions exist to convert them.
Carrier components Carrier components Carrier components form a ceramic matrix in the large inner surfaces of which catalytically active components are present in finely dispersed form.
Stabilizing components Stabilizing components Stabilizing components protect the carrier and storage components as well as the catalytically active components against excessive thermal and chemical impairments.
Honeycombs Honeycombs The honeycombs to be coated in the main exhibit 10 to 250 parallel channels per square centimeter. They are usually extruded from a ceramic, e.g. cordierite, or manufactured as a special form from metal foil.
Arrangement in the exhaust system branch The catalysts are preferably integrated into the exhaust gas system in such a way that the gases flow through them as uniformly as possible. Each deviation from the ideal distribution of the gases reduces the theoretically possible conversion of a catalyst such that the nonuniform flow necessitates an accordingly more powerful, i.e. larger catalyst for example.
The volume of the honeycombs, which in the technical sense is termed the catalyst volume, depends in particular on the required quantity of catalytic components which is required for the desired reduction of pollutants. A limiting factor in this respect is often the quantity which can be applied per unit of volume to the honeycomb. On the engine side the exhaust gas back pressure of the coated honeycomb constitutes a limitation. On the vehicle side the available installation space frequently limits the catalyst volume. In Euro 6 exhaust emissions standard diesel vehicles the total catalyst volume is often three to six times the engine displacement.
Catalytic processes for : exhaust gas treatment Boundary conditions Catalysts , heavy metals from the engine oil, inorganic additives, and other not completely combusted substances in the engine can cause progressive contamination of the catalysts quickly or slowly over the vehicle's service life. In this way, the efficiency of the exhaust gas treatment system is drastically reduced in part.
In the case of the catalyst requirements imposed on the engine and vehicle applications it is also essential to adhere to certain exhaust gas composition limits and the exhaust gas temperature, even if critical conditions in some cases only occur on a limited basis in terms of time and space on the catalyst surface. For example, temperatures which lead to local fusing and thus destruction of a particulate filter are to be avoided during soot burn off. This necessitates, for example, a limitation of the amount of soot to be stored.
Generally speaking, a faster progression of the catalyzed reaction can be achieved in a catalytic process with a larger quantity of active components if the activation barrier is exceeded and if substance transport processes do not limit the reaction speed. But even when large quantities are used the exhaust gas temperature is always too low directly after engine starting to achieve significant pollutant conversion. The catalyst heats up with a constant exhaust gas flow. The temperature at which 50 % of the pollutant emitted by the engine is converted is called the light off temperature. During cold starting of a diesel engine several minutes regularly elapse before the catalysts achieve optimum operating conditions. This is counteracted by applications with engine heating measures. Electrical heating measures have also been implemented in special applications. Storage components of the catalysts converter moreover store pollutants in the cold start phase and desorb them once the light off temperature is exceeded. An example: Special zeolites are suitable for storing some hydrocarbons in such a way.
Friction belt drives: Application Friction belt drives are used in automobiles predominantly to drive accessories can be realized.
drive 1 Alternator, 2 Tension pulley,  3 Idler pulley, 4 Crankshaft,  5 Water pump,  6 Power steering pump,  7 A/C compressor.
the pretensioning force FHL of the belt must also be taken into consideration.
F1 Force on load side, F2 Force on slack side, FB Loading of belt by wrap, FC Loading of belt by centrifugal forces, M Transmitted torque, o Angular frequency.
The dynamic matching of the system can be optimized by selecting the appropriate tension member material. Tension member materials with a high modulus of elasticity  per rib can be absorbed.
The back of the belt can be designed as a backing or as a rubber coating. The back of the belt forms a protective layer for the tension members. In most applications, it serves only to guide the belt quietly via the idler and tension pulleys. In some applications, however, it also serves to drive accessories which are subject to low load .
The rib profile can be manufactured by grinding, cutting or molding in a tool. The latter delivers the greatest precision in the rib geometry, helping to improve running time and noise generation. Fabric layers on the rib side additionally help to increase robustness.
acc. to ISO 9981 Designation of a ribbed V belt with six ribs of profile code PK and of reference length 800 mm: Ribbed V belts 6PK 800.
erance band, it is absolutely essential for : a detailed configuration to fall back on the characteristic values of the respective belt or pulley manufacturers.
It is essential to utilize optimum system design to eliminate in particular slip noises, such as, for instance, the familiar V belt squeaking in cold and damp weather conditions. It is also necessary to utilize design already to avoid belt noises caused by pulley misalignment. For belt driven starting applications the shear loads to be transmitted by the ribs must most also be taken into account. Specially developed belt designs fulfill these requirements without damage caused by ribs shear off. In order to assess the service life, appropriate fatigue tests according to Wohler must be carried out .
b Belt width, h Belt height, rk Radius at rib head, ra Radius at groove head, rg Radius at rib base, ri  Radius at groove base, s  Rib spacing, e Groove spacing, f  Spacing groove to thrust collar or ring, aR Groove angle, belt, aS Groove angle, pulley, hs Allowance, test pin nominal diameter to reference diameter, ds Test pin nominal diameter, da Outside diameter , db Reference diameter, d  Allowance, test pin nominal diameter to outside diameter, dW Effective diameter.
UAM0053 2Y rg rk 1 s b h ds da db db dw d hs hb f e 11 ra ri a b c aS aR
Design criteria: Both manufacturer's own and cross manufacturer computing programs are used to design accessory drives. Important input parameters are the arrangement of components, i.e. the drive configuration, the torque curves, the moments of inertia of the components, the torsional vibration of the crankshaft, and the belt data. With these data, it is possible to calculate and optimize the system geometry, such as, for example, belt run lengths and wrap angle, the system natural frequencies, the slip limit angles, the belt run forces, the beltrun vibrations, and also the service life of the belt.
Recommended Recommended minimum wrap angles minimum wrap angles Crankshaft 150deg Alternator  160deg Power steering pump,  A/C compressor  90deg Tension pulley  60deg Misalignment and Misalignment and entry angle entry angle In order to avoid unacceptable belt wear and noises, it is important that the entry angle of the belt into the grooved pulleys, depending on the belt design and the required service life, does not exceed 1.2 to 1.5deg.
System natural frequency System natural frequency The system natural frequency of the belt drive should not coincide in the idle range with the engine's ignition frequency as otherwise strong belt vibrations could occur on account of natural resonance.
Minimum diameters of pulleys and Minimum diameters of pulleys and idler idler pulleys pulleys In practice the smallest belt pulley is often located on the alternator in order to facilitate the high rotational speeds that are required there. Typical alternator pulleys have a diameter of 49 to 56 mm. Belt fatigue increases exponentially when very small pulleys are used; this must be taken into account when the belt is designed. Diameters not less than 60 mm are recommended for idler pulleys which generate strong belt back deflection.
Belt tensioning systems Belt tension in accessory drives is today usually provided by way of automatic tension pulleys. These tension pulleys ensure that the belt is almost constantly pretensioned over the belt's service life by compensating belt elongation and belt wear. The design of the tension pulleys is significantly dictated by the space available. The system tensions are usually 40 to 70 N per rib.
a) Two belt tensioner concept, b) Pendulum belt tensioner variant 1, c) Pendulum belt tensioner variant 2, 1 Crankshaft, 2 Tension pulley, 3 Starter alternator unit, 4 Tension pulley, 5 Refrigerant compressor. a b c 1 2 3 4 5 SAM0225 1Y
To monitor the dynamic response of the : belt drive, common tensioning systems have a mechanical spring which works in combination with a damping unit.
Two tension pulleys are used in beltdriven start/stop systems. The tension pulleys either each have an independent spring element .
Stretch Fit drives Elastic ribbed V belts are also used occasionally in less complex belt drives. These use nylon as the tension member material and do not require belt tensioning systems. This belt type is pulled during fitting onto the pulleys by overstretching. The belt length must be designed in such a way that the belt pretensioning force is so high after fitting that, while wear and elongation over the required service life as well as the relevant ambient conditions are taken into account, sufficient pre tension is still maintained without retensioning. Today, belt drives with up to four pulleys, i.e. up to three driven components, are possible. Positive belt drives Application Toothed belts in accordance with ISO 9010  are used in timing drives to drive camshafts or the high pressure fuel injection pump synchronously with the crankshaft. The main advantages over competing means of drive such as the gear drive or the chain lie in the simplicity of the drive, the flexibility of the belt guidance, the low friction, the low noise emissions, and the capacity to compensate for high dynamic peak loads. Accessories such as oil or water pumps can be integrated into the drive or driven individually . In modern applications, in contrast to earlier applications, it is possible in many cases to dispense with a replacement interval because of the use of innovative belt technologies and optimized design of the overall system. The low weight and the low costs also militate for the use of a toothed belt.
Forces and loads in the belt drive: In positive belt drives the torque is transmitted by the meshing of the toothed belt teeth and a special toothed belt pulley from the crankshaft to the toothed belt and from the toothed belt to the output components . The actual power transmission is performed by the tension members embedded in the toothed belt. The toothing renders slip impossible, which means that toothed belt drives can be used for synchronization.
The fabric is made of high strength nylon and has an abrasion proof and wear resistant coating. It protects the rubber teeth against wear and from being shorn off, and improves the running performance.
of toothed belt a) Longitudinal section, b) Overhead view, tooth side, c) Overhead view, back side, d) Overhead view with depiction of tension members twisted in Sand Z shapes.
In some high load applications belts with backing can also be used for increased reinforcement. This fabric reduces the risk of the belt running in the axial direction. It also improves belt service life in very cold ambient conditions , for example when the engine is started.
The tension member consists of twisted glass fibers a material which is characterized by high tensile strength together with a high willingness to bend. As a result of the production process, the tension members are arranged in a spiral shape in the belt in the effective line, and twisted in pairs in Sand Z shapes . This ensures that the belt is subject to predominantly neutral running.
Toothed belt profiles The first camshaft belts were based on the classic Power Grip trapezoidal tooth shape is, in most cases, 9.525 mm for diesel engines, and 8.00 mm for gasoline engines. Higher forces can be transmitted with a larger pitch, while a smaller pitch has advantages with regard to noise and space.
Double sided toothed belts can be used for applications where the direction of rotation is reversed .
Drive system: toothed belt The most important requirement of the toothed belt drive system is that it should synchronize the camshaft in relation to the crankshaft over the service life of the engine. This is an important criterion for adhering to the consumption and emission values. It is possible to keep the elongation of the toothed belt under 0.1 % of the belt length by selecting the appropriate materials for the toothed belt, and by using an automatic tensioning system and optimized system dynamics. This results in 4 cylinder engines in a timing deviation of 1 to 1.5deg referred to the crankshaft.
a) Longitudinal section, b) Overhead view.  P Pitch, D Addendum, W Rib thickness, B Width, PLD/2 Effective line distance  PLD/2 B D W P SAM0129Y
The service life requirements are currently : in the range of 240,000 to 300,000 km, while the temperature requirements range from 40 degC in the cold state up to 150 degC engine compartment temperature. Conspicuous noises caused for example by meshing are perceived to be offending and are therefore not acceptable. The efficiency of a toothed belt drive is approx. 99 %. New materials and manufacturing processes today permit the use of toothed belts in an oil environment to drive oil pumps or to control the timing of camshafts. For the latter, it is possible to dispense with leading the camshaft out of the engine block and hence with the customary shaft seal on the main bearing. The advantages of this technology are the potential friction and noise reductions. The oil environment has not only a frictionreducing, but also a damping effect. This in turn has a positive impact, particularly for highly dynamic downsizing engines.
Important input parameters are the arrangement of components, i.e. the drive configuration, the torque curves of the components, and calculated from these the dynamic peripheral forces, as well as the belt data. With these data, it is possible to calculate and optimize the system geometry, such as, for example, belt run lengths and wrap angles, and the system dynamics.
Recommended Recommended minimum wrap angles minimum wrap angles Crankshaft 150deg Camshaft, high pressure pump 100deg Accessory wheel  90deg Automatic tension pulley  50deg Idler pulley  30deg Damping pulley  10deg Periodic Periodic meshing meshing To avoid uneven belt wear, it is important to prevent the same belt teeth from engaging in the same wheel gaps. To assess this periodic meshing the tooth ratio of the number of teeth of the belt and the belt pulleys and the number of engine cylinders or the number of pistons in the high pressure pump are considered.
Periodic meshing does not occur when the following decimal values are avoided for the tooth ratio: Z.0; Z.25; Z.33; Z.5; Z.66; Z.75.
Belt run lengths: Belt run lengths In order to avoid resonance noises at idle speed, it is important to ensure that free belt run lengths are not in the area of 75 mm and 130 mm.
Minimum number of teeth and minimum Minimum number of teeth and minimum diameters of toothed wheels and idler diameters of toothed wheels and idler pulleys pulleys Pitch 9.525 mm 17 teeth Pitch 8.00 mm 17 teeth Non toothed idler pulleys dia. 50 mm Damping pulleys dia. 28.5 mm Tolerances of toothed wheels and idler Tolerances of toothed wheels and idler pulleys pulleys Concentricity, lateral running: dia. <= 100 mm 0.1 mm dia. > 100 mm 0.001 mm per mm dia.
Axial guidance A toothed belt must be guided at least at one wheel on both sides with flanged wheels to prevent it running off the belt run. Essentially, it is important to ensure that toothed wheels with flanged wheels are exactly flush with the other wheels so that the belt is not deflected from its course. Limit values for belt edge wear caused by excessively high run off forces must be taken into consideration.
Belt tensioning systems The required constantly high belt tension, and compensation of the tension increase over temperature and belt elongation are usually provided in today's timing drives by tension pulleys. The design of the tension pulleys is significantly dictated by the space available. The most widely used system is the mechanical, friction damped compact tensioner.
Essential design parameters for monitoring the system dynamics are the spring moment and the damping characteristic. Hydraulic tension pulleys are also used in some applications in the event of very high dynamic forces in the toothed belt drive. These are characterized by their asymmetrical damping performance.
Tensioning systems can also be used in an oil environment if an appropriate adaptation of the damping level is taken into consideration.
Overview: Camshafts are used to control the gas exchange valves; these camshafts open and close the valves by means of direct actuation via bucket tappets or lever assemblies. Camshafts are driven on modern overhead valve engines, i.e. overhead camshafts, with the aid of a belt drive, while side mounted camshafts are connected via a geartrain to the crankshaft pinion. Toothed belts, rolleror sleevetype chains, and tooth type chains are used to drive overhead camshafts. For fast running assemblies such as motor racing engines for example the drive is also effected with spur gears.
The most important criteria in deciding on the type of drive are costs, space, ease of maintenance, service life, and noise buildup. The great advantage of chain drives over toothed belt drives is that they are completely maintenance free over the entire service life of the engine, while toothed belts, depending on the application, have to be retensioned or changed according to the maintenance interval. In addition to the camshaft, timing drives in modern engines frequently drive other assemblies, such as the oil pump and the high pressure pump for gasoline direct injection or for common rail .
As both camshaft and crankshaft rotate nonuniformly and are exposed to torsional vibrations, the drive is subject to highly complex dynamic stresses. Furthermore, the torque demand of the high pressure pump is subject to very strong periodic fluctuations, and thus generates further excitation of the timing chain drive.
Timing chains Designs of steel link chains In the case of standard chains, a distinction is made between rollerand sleevetype chains. There are also simplex and duplex chains. The tooth type chain is a special type of chain.
Roller type chain Roller type chain A steel link chain is composed of inner and outer links. The inner link of a roller type chain consists for example or two inner plates and two sleeves pressed into the plate eyes . The outer link consists of two outer plates and two link pins which connect the inner and outer links. In a roller type chain a roller is fitted over the sleeve.
1 Camshafts, 2 Tensioning rail,  3 Fuel injection pump,  4 Chain tensioner system, 5 Tensioning rail,  6 Crankshaft, 7 Guide rail,  8 Intermediate shaft sprocket group,  9 Guide rail, 10 Crankshaft sprocket.
such that a different point on the circum : ference is always contacted. The lubricant between the rollers and sleeves helps to muffle noise and dampen shocks.
Sleeve type chain Sleeve type chain In the case of a sleeve type chain , the tooth flanks of the sprocket constantly touch the fixed sleeves at the same point such that the sleeves are subjected to an additional load. Perfect lubrication is therefore particularly important for these drives.
While having identical pitch the chain pitch defines the distance from pin center to pin center and force at break, sleevetype chains have a larger joint surface than the corresponding roller chains, since the omission of the roller means that the pin diameter can be enlarged. A larger joint surface results in a lower joint surface pressure and thus lower wear in the joints and a longer service life for the chain timing drive.
Sleeve type chains have proven useful in camshaft drives subject to high loads in diesel engines, because increased wear resistance is called for here on account of the increased entry of soot into the engine oil.
a way that they can transmit the force between the chain and the sprocket, whereas, in the case of rolleror sleeve type chains, the connection with the sprocket is established via pin, sleeve, or roller.
Tooth type chains can be built to virtually any desired width without the need for fundamental structural change. Guide plates, which are located either in the middle or on the outside , are fitted to prevent the sprocket from running off. A further variant of the tooth type chain is the design that is toothed on both sides, which can then be used like a rollerand sleeve type chain.
1 Link pin, 2 Sleeve, 3 Inner plate, 4 Outer plate, 5 Roller, 6 Tooth center plate, 7 Tooth inner plate, 8 Guide plate.
Selecting chain types When choosing the chain types is positively driven by a drive wheel. With the sprocket at constant angular velocity the chain is accelerated and decelerated and consequently dynamically loaded.
Decades of experience have shown that some dimensions for roller , sleeve and tooth type chains are particularly suitable for timing drives. These are 3/8" sleeve type chains for diesel engines and 8 mm sleeve type chains and 8 mm roller type chains for gasoline engines. If in the development of a gasoline engine particular demands are made with regard to engine acoustics, 8 mm or 6.35 mm toothtype chains should be used.
Requirements of chains Four important factors determine the usage characteristics of timing chains: ultimate tensile strength, fatigue strength, resistance to wear, and acoustic behavior. A break may be caused by the static or dynamic load at break being exceeded. Especially in the case of timing drives, no uniform load will be encountered such that the fatigue strength of the chain is the strength limiting quantity. The chain is subjected to a dynamic load as a result of the pulsating torques of the camshafts, the high pressure pump, the rotational non uniformity of the crankshaft, and the pulsating axial chain force caused by the polygon effect. Here, the safety limit to the fatigue strength of the chain must not be exceeded, since the number of such load alternations during an engine's service life is in each case greater than 108 load alternations .
In today's engines with precise timing and minimal clearance between piston and valve, minimal elongations due to chain wear can be achieved. Length increases caused by wear of just 0.2 to 0.5 % of the chain length for an engine mileage of up to 350,000 km are ensured today by the optimization of the pin/sleeve joint.
In particular direct injection turbodiesel engines but also the latest models of direct injection gasoline engines require timing chains that exhibit the highest levels of wear resistance.
To improve the wear resistance, the link pins are coated in a final operation with a layer of hard material, either chromium carbide or chromium nitride.
Design criteria for chain timing drives : A chain timing drive is with mass, rigidity, and damping an oscillatory system with several degrees of freedom. If subjected to corresponding excitation for example by the camshaft, crankshaft or high pressure pump, this can, on account of interactions, cause resonance effects which lead to extreme timing drive load.
Computational check  of chain timing drives Layout drawings are taken as the basis to create a chain drive model which is used for the dynamic computation of timing drives. The timing drive is described by mass parameters, chain stiffness, and damping values.
Tensioning and guide rails are modeled as elastic bodies, the tensioning element is depicted with all the function elements. The simulation calculation delivers the necessary torsional vibration angle deviations and all the force and moment characteristics.
Friction reduction  of chain timing drives To reduce the CO2 emissions from an internal combustion engine, every savings potential must be utilized to reduce fuel consumption. In this way, a friction optimized timing drive design can also make a contribution to reducing the CO2 emissions.
The decisive factor is the optimal layout of the chain line. Avoiding pronounced curvatures of the tensioning and guide rails reduces the normal forces and hence reduces the friction.
Chain plate quality is of crucial importance to the frictional behavior of timing chains. The manufacture of chain plates involves the use of different blanking processes which create textures on the surface based on the manufacturing process used. Chains with precision blanked plates deliver the best values.
Due to their internal friction and the contact of pins and plates, even timing chains of the most important types exhibit different frictional behavior. Figure 5 clearly shows the disadvantages of the tooth type chain with identical overall width.
Sprockets : The tooth shape of the sprockets is standardized for roller , sleeveand tooth type chains .
Ck45) and alloyed steels are used. Precision blanked and machine cut wheels with the heat treatment appropriate for the material are used.
Chain tensioning and  chain guide elements By using permanently acting clamping and guide elements which are precisely matched to the engine in question, it is possible to optimize the chain drive in such a way that its service life corresponds to that of the engine.
Chain tensioner The chain tensioner , mechanically or hydraulically acting, assumes a range of tasks in the timing drive. On the one hand, the timing chain is pre tensioned in all operating conditions on the loose side under a defined load, even in the event of wear elongation that occurs during operation. Slack run refers to the non pulled, as it were load free chain section. A damping element either friction or viscous damping reduces vibrations to an acceptable level.
a) Sintered crankshaft gear,  b) Precision blanked camshaft gear,  c) Sprocket with sealing surface,  d) Two track sprocket for duplex chain. a b c d UAM0135Y
a rule, in oil pump drives which are sub : ject to low load. In special cases, this mechanical chain tensioner can even be omitted completely.
Tensioning and guide rails Simple rails made of plastic or metal .
Here, in the case of the tensioning rail, a friction lining of glass fiber free polyamide is sprayed or clipped onto a carrier of heat resistant polyamide with 30 to 50 % glass fiber content. The sliding rails are usually designed in plastic as one component rails, and are used for chain guidance. Figure 8 shows some types of tensioning and guide rails.
The process of converting any type of : energy into mechanical energy to drive a vehicle creates heat as a waste product, whether it be by friction of different engine components against each other or by the combustion of fuel in the engine. In order to optimally utilize the conversion of the chemical energy of fuel into kinetic energy, this process must take place under controlled conditions and, to protect the  engine and its components, also under controlled temperatures. The waste heat that is generated must be reliably dissipated to atmosphere under all operating and ambient conditions.
Air cooling Design and operating principle Cooling air is routed by dynamic pressure or a fan around the external walls of the cylinder casing . These walls are finned in order to achieve better cooling results thanks to the increased surface area. The cooling air quantity can be  controlled for example by specifically restricting its flow at the vehicle's cooling air inlets, which is achieved for example with thermostat controlled flaps or by means of the rotational speed of a loador temperature dependent fan.
Heat absorbed by the engine oil is dissipated via cooling fins on the oil pan which are also located in the air stream.
Advantages and disadvantages  of air cooling The advantages of air cooling are simple and cost effective construction, reliable operation, and lower weight when compared with water cooling systems.
The disadvantages are higher noise generation, lower temperature consistency of all engine parts, and poorer thermal behavior at high specific power outputs.
Applications Today, air cooling is mainly used for  motorcycle and aircraft engines and in special applications. Extra small engines in model making applications also use air cooling.
The expected operating conditions for a vehicle can only dictate which cooling principle is chosen. In Arctic regions, where temperatures down to 50 degC are experienced, water cooled engines cannot be used owing to the risk of the water freezing; for this reason air cooling must be used in these regions.
1 Oil cooler, 2 Cooling air fan, 3 Cylinder with cooling fins, 4 Oil pan, 5 Pressure relief valve, 6 Oil pump , 7 Lube oil filter, 8 Thermostat.
Water cooling: Design and operating principle Cooling circuit Cooling circuit In contrast to air cooling, with water cooling the waste heat from the engine is not dissipated directly to the ambient air.  Instead, the waste heat is absorbed by the coolant and transported via this medium to the main coolant radiator . Here, heat is exchanged between the coolant and the ambient air. The coolingair flow rate is controlled by a fan, and the coolant is circulated in the circuit by a coolant pump.
Coolant Coolant Coolants are a mixture of water, antifreeze . Adding antifreeze in concentrations of 30 to 50 % firstly stops the coolant from freezing even at temperatures down to 25 degC and secondly raises the coolant boiling temperature to allow coolant temperatures of up to 120 degC at a pressure of 1.4 bar in passenger cars.
Radiator designs The cores of the coolant radiators in modern passenger cars are almost exclusively made of aluminum. Aluminum radiators are also being used to an ever increasing extent in a wide range of commercial vehicles and trucks throughout the world. There are two assembly variants: brazed radiators and mechanically joined or assembled radiators.
Flat tube/corrugated fin systems Flat tube/corrugated fin systems For cooling high performance engines, or when space is limited, the best solution is a brazed flat tube and corrugated fin radiator layout with minimized aerodynamic resistance on the air intake side.
1 Engine, 2 Fan, 3 Coolant line , 8 Thermostat.
flat tubes and the flat tubes to the radiator : base in an oven. The solder material is applied as a layer to the materials.
The radiator tank ensures that the coolant is distributed throughout the core. These tanks are made of fiberglass reinforced polyamides, and are injectionmolded with all connections and mountings in a single unit. They are flange mounted to the radiator core and sealed by an integrated elastomer sealing element.
Operating principle The coolant is routed through the radiator tank to the radiator core. It flows through the flat tubes before emerging again from the opposite radiator tank. The hot coolant in the flat tubes dissipates heat to the corrugated fins, while the cooling air flowing through the radiator core cools the corrugated fins. The soldered connections guarantee a good heat transfer from the tubes to the fins. Gills in the corrugated fins, which are brought together in gill fields, bring about additional swirling of the cooling air. This results in improved heat dissipation.
1 Radiator tank, 2 Radiator base, 3 Gasket, 4 Round tube, 5 Cooling fin,  6 Gill zones, 7 Turbulators.
initially inserted loosely into the cooling : fins and flared with a tool. This creates an internal connection between the tubes and the fins. The connection is established exclusively by the mechanical flaring of the tube. However, the heat transfer between the tubes and the fins is much worse than in the soldered systems.
Operating principle The cooling air flows through the radiator core between the cooling fins. These are corrugated or slotted at right angles to the direction of air flow. They are like the corrugated fins in soldered radiators also fitted with turbulators and gill zones, inducing air turbulence and improving the cooling effect.
Options for increasing  Options for increasing  radiator performance radiator performance Gills and a larger number of corrugations are integrated into the cooling fins on the cooling air side to enhance thermal transfer. The gills induce turbulence in the cooling air flowing through, and the larger number of corrugations produces a larger surface area. These measures increase the quantity of heat that can be dissipated. Further measures to increase cooling efficiency include the use of tubes with the lowest possible width and wall thickness, and turbulators on the coolant side, provided the attendant pressure losses remain within acceptable limits. The negative effect of these performance enhancing measures is the higher pressure drop on both the cooling air and coolant sides, which must be compensated by a highercapacity fan and on the coolant side by a more powerful coolant pump.
Coolant expansion tank Mounted at the highest point of the  cooling circuit is the airtight expansion tank; this tank has a filler neck through which coolant is poured into the cooling system. When the engine is running the expansion tank takes up excess coolant that expands due to heating. Where necessary, it returns it to the cooling circuit. As the coolant heats up, so too the system pressure in the cooling system increases. This causes the coolant boiling point to rise.
The expansion tank's air volume must be large enough to absorb the coolant's thermal expansion during rapid pressure buildup, and prevent the coolant from boiling over under the permitted operating conditions. At excessively high operating temperatures and thus also excessively high operating pressures the expansion tank protects the cooling circuit by means of a pressure relief valve.
The expansion tank also provides a reliable escape channel for pressurized gases, preventing cavitation of the kind that tends to occur on the intake side of the coolant pump.
Expansion tanks are injection molded in plastic , although simple designs can also be blow molded to shape. A system of hoses is normally used to connect the expansion tank to the cooling system. The expansion tank is mounted in the engine compartment at the location representing the highest point in the cooling system to ensure air is expelled effectively. In some cases, the expansion tank can form a single unit with the radiator tank, or the two can be joined by means of a flange or plug connection. The position and shape of the filler neck can be used to limit capacity, thus preventing overfilling. An electronic level sensor can be fitted to monitor the level of the coolant. The coolant level can also be monitored by manufacturing the expansion tank completely or partially in natural color, transparent plastic with molded level markers. However, colorless polypropylene is sensitive to ultraviolet rays. For this reason, the transparent part of the expansion tank should not be exposed to direct sunlight.
Cooling air fan Design Design Since motor vehicles also require substantial cooling capacity at low speeds, force air ventilation is required for the  radiator. Injection molded plastic fans with drive power ratings extending up to 30 kW are now used as standard in commercial vehicles. A fan of this type is driven by a mechanical coupling with the internal combustion engine, for example via a belt drive. The fan can also be mounted directly on the crankshaft.
Single piece injection molded plastic fans : are generally used in passengers cars; these are usually driven by DC brush  motors or brushless DC motors. These motors are installed in the fan hub. The electrical drive power is around 400 W in the small car segment, and extends up to 1 kW in the luxury class segment and in offroad vehicles. Although blade design and arrangement can be selected to provide relatively quiet running, these fans have considerable noise levels at high rotation speeds.
In some passenger car applications, in particular offroad vehicles with very high  engine power outputs in combination with equipment options for operation in hot  climates and equipment variants for diesel engines and air conditioning systems, the capacity of the electric drive is no longer sufficient to provide the volume of air  necessary to ensure effective cooling. Fan output figures in excess of 1 kW can only be achieved when the fan is driven mechanically by the engine. However, this is only possible with a longitudinally  installed engine.
Control of electrically driven Control of electrically driven fans fans Depending on vehicle and operating conditions, the unassisted air stream can provide sufficient cooling up to 95 % of the time. It is thus possible to economize on energy that would otherwise have to provide the power to drive the fan. For this purpose, electric fans use a multistage or continuous control system that specifically adapts the operating periods and speed of the fan to the required cooling capacity. A multistage control system may consist of relays and series resistors, while continuous variable control necessitates the use of power electronics. Electric thermostatic switches or the engine control unit supply the input signals for the control system.
lating the oil filling  The secondary section of the viscous clutch is divided into a working chamber and a supply chamber. When the viscous clutch is not cut in, only a small amount of working fluid is in the working chamber, such that only a very small amount of torque can be transmitted due to the high degree of slip between primary disk and secondary section. The viscous working fluid is a silicone oil.
viscous clutch 1 Cover with cooling fins,  2 Primary disk,  3 Valve bore,  4 Valve lever,  5 Thermal bimetallic strip,  6 Operating pin,  7 Seal,  8 Supply chamber,  9 Working chamber, 10 Return bore,  11 Fan, 12 Mounting bolt,  13 Basic body, 14 Ball bearing,  15 Flanged shaft.
As the temperature increases, the bulging : of the bimetallic strip causes the operating pin to open the valve. Silicone oil flows from the supply chamber into the working chamber. This reduces the slip between primary disk and secondary section in turn increasing the fan speed. The fan speed and thus the cooling capacity are infinitely increased.
As the temperature decreases, the bimetallic strip cools and causes the operating pin to close the valve slowly. The silicone oil flows through the pump body back  into the supply chamber. The fan speed  decreases. The amount of silicone oil  located in the working chamber determines the output power transmitted by the clutch and therefore the speed of the fan. A distinction is made between types of viscous clutch, based on how the valve is actuated: Firstly, as already described, the temperature dependent, selfgoverning clutch which varies its speed  infinitely by means of a bimetallic element, an operating pin, and a valve lever. The controlled variable is the temperature of the air leaving the radiator, and thus indirectly the temperature of the coolant. The electrically activated clutch is now used in 95 % of heavy duty commercial vehicles. In this clutch type the valve lever is electromagnetically actuated and thus the oil quantity in the working chamber is regulated. Instead of just one controlled variable, a wide range of input variables is used for control purposes. These are usually the temperature limits of the various cooling media.
Regulation of coolant temperature A motor vehicle's engine operates in a very wide range of climatic conditions and with major fluctuations in engine load. The consequences of this are significant variations in coolant and engine temperatures, which in turn result in increased engine wear, unfavorable exhaust gas composition, higher fuel consumption, and unreliable vehicle heating. The temperature of the coolant must be regulated in order to counteract these unwanted side effects and to keep the coolant and engine temperature as constant as possible.
radiator while simultaneously releasing coolant flow from the engine outlet to the bypass line .
1 Connector, 2 Connection to radiator,  3 Housing of working element,  4 Elastomer insert,  5 Plunger,  6 Bypass spring,  7 Bypass valve,  8 Housing,  9 Heating resistor,  10 Double acting disk valve .
ture. At wide open throttle .
Radiator design The size and therefore the cooling capacity of a specific radiator can be determined by calculation, based on correlation equations derived from tests relating to thermal transfer and flow pressure loss. The mass of air that flows through the radiator in the vehicle is a decisive factor and depends on the driving speed, the resistance to flow in the engine compartment, the  resistance to flow of the radiator, and the efficiency of the fan.
The primary objective of radiator design is to maintain the coolant temperature at the engine outlet below a maximum permissible value under given operating conditions. Because at low driving speeds the dynamic pressure of the cooling air and thus the cooling air flow rate in the radiator are very low, the cooling air flow required for adequate cooling must be  ensured either by a high output fan or by a radiator with low flow resistance, while a high air mass flow rate facilitates the use of smaller radiators with high flow  resistance. However, the latter causes high energy consumption if the air mass flow is generated by a powerful fan.
The task of determining the most favorable solution in terms of technical feasibility and economic efficiency is a matter of optimization that is best solved by the application of simulation tools. The most suitable and effective simulation tools describe all components that have an  influence on air mass flow. They depict the radiator as an integral heat transfer medium or heat exchanger. The simulation results are checked by way of on vehicle tests conducted in wind tunnels.
Intercooling : engines, appropriate steps would need to be taken to prevent engine knocking attributed to mixture enrichment or retarded ignition timing. Consequently, intercooling indirectly serves to reduce fuel consumption and exhaust emissions. Design variations Basically speaking, both the ambient air and the engine coolant can be employed to cool the charge air. With only few exceptions, air cooled intercoolers are now used both on passenger cars and commercial vehicles.
Air cooled intercoolers Air cooled intercoolers Air cooled intercoolers can be mounted in front of or next to the engine radiator, or even completely separate from the adiator at a different location in the engine compartment. A separately positioned intercooler can utilize either the unassisted vehicle air stream or its own fan. With the intercooler located in front of the engine radiator, the cooling air fan ensures sufficient air flow even at low vehicle speeds. However, a drawback of this arrangement is that the cooling air is itself heated in the process. To compensate for this effect, the higher temperature of the inflowing cooling air must be taken into account in the design of the engine radiator.
The system of corrugated aluminum fins and tubes employed for the intercooler core is similar to the design of the engine coolant radiator. Wide tubes with internal fins provide superior performance and structural integrity in actual practice. The fin density on the cooling air side is relatively low and corresponds approximately to the density of the inner fins in order to achieve a good distribution of thermal transfer resistance.
Engine cooling and indirect intercooling with separate low temperature circuit. 1 Engine,  2 Fan,  3 Coolant pump,  4 Coolant line  , 10 Auxiliary water pump for  low temperature circuit, 11 Charge air coolant cooler, 12 Charge air line, 13 Exhaust gas turbocharger.
to increased stresses on the charge air : inlet side are injection molded from highly heat resistant PPA . They are flange mounted to the radiator core and sealed by an integrated elastomer sealing element. Plenum chambers which feature undercut shapes or are intended for hightemperature applications are cast in aluminum and welded to the core.
Coolant cooled intercoolers Coolant cooled intercoolers Coolant cooled intercoolers can be installed in virtually any location in the engine compartment, as there are no technical difficulties to supplying the system with coolant. In addition, thanks to its modest dimensions, this type of intercooler requires substantially less space than the air cooled intercooler. Coolant cooled intercoolers have a high power density. However, coolant at a very low temperature must be available in order to effectively cool the charge air. This requirement is of particular significance in commercial vehicles and heavy duty trucks as, in this case, it is necessary to heat the charge air to a level of 15 K above the ambient temperature. Because this stipulation cannot be implemented with the temperature level of the normal cooling circuit at approx. 100 degC, it is necessary, in order to cool the charge air, to install a low temperature radiator to ensure coolant is available in a separate circuit at the required temperature level.
Exhaust gas cooling Exhaust gas recirculation is used in diesel engines to reduce raw nitrogen oxide emissions . Exhaust gas recirculation delivers the best results when the recirculated exhaust gas is cooled in an EGR cooler.
Design of an EGR cooler A central aspect in the design of an EGR cooler is, as well as its output, its durability. The former is achieved either by specially shaped tubes which generate a high level of turbulence in the tube or by internal fins in the tubes which increase the surface area for heat exchange. The essential characteristic here is the tendency of an EGR cooler towards fouling. This can be significantly influenced by a suitable design of the winglets or tube fins. Figure 9 shows such an EGR cooler in longitudinal section. The winglet tubes direct the hot exhaust gas and are themselves surrounded by coolant.
1 Stainless steel housing , 2 Coolant inlet, 3 Length compensation, 4 Exhaust gas inlet, 5 Stainless steel cooler base, 6 Stainless steel winglet tubes.
condense in the cooler. The condensate : produced has a lower pH value and  attacks the material like a strong acid. For this reason, the gas directing parts of EGR coolers are frequently made of stainless steel.
When the EGR cooler is in operation the tubes get hotter than the housing. Suitable design measures must be used to compensate for the linear difference in the cooler.
The issue of vibration also plays an important role in view of the fact that the cooler is usually bolted directly on the engine. The EGR cooler must therefore be as rigid as possible in its design. The first natural frequency of an EGR cooler should at least be above the first natural frequency of the engine block. For this reason, the brackets of such EGR coolers are specifically very rigid and sometimes multiply ribbed in design.
The cooler housing is often made of stainless steel, which can be strengthened further by cold working. The exhaust pipes connected to the cooler should be isolated at the engine end. This isolation is achieved by bellows or by a comparable structure.
Cooling circuit The coolant comes primarily from the  engine cooling circuit, with the EGR cooler being cooled by coolant flowing out of the engine. A variant of this arrangement is "two stage exhaust gas cooling". Here the exhaust gas is cooled in a first stage as described above. There is also a second cooling stage, which is supplied by a cooling circuit independent from the engine , the exhaust gas can also be cooled significantly below the otherwise normal values, increasing the effect of reducing nitrogen oxide. The two cooling stages are either integrated together in a single housing or designed separately as two independent components.
Oil and fuel cooling Oil coolers are often needed in motor vehicles to cool both the engine oil and transmission oil. They are used when the heat losses from the engine or transmission can no longer be dissipated via the surface of the oil pan or the transmission with the result that the permitted oil temperatures are exceeded.
Airor coolant cooled oil coolers are used to suit their application profile. Oil to air coolers Oil to air coolers are predominantly made of aluminum. In most cases, soldered flattube/corrugated fin systems .
 1 Collector tank with oil connections, 2 Base, 3 Partition,  4 Flat tube with turbulence insert, 5 Corrugated fin, 6 Side section, 7 Bracket.
The principle of oil to air cooling is ideal : for use in commercial vehicles and powerful passenger cars to cool the transmission oil. To ensure good ventilation, they are ideally mounted upstream of the coolant radiator, but can also be mounted elsewhere in the engine compartment.
Oil to air coolers which are not located upstream of the main coolant radiator and are thus outside the range of action of the main fan must be supplied with cooling air accordingly, for example by exposure to dynamic air pressure or by a separate electric fan.
Oil to coolant coolers Aluminum stack designs employed in oilto coolant coolers have largely replaced stainless steel disk coolers, double tube oil coolers, and aluminum forked tube coolers.
Disk stack oil coolers Disk stack oil coolers Disk stack oil coolers are made of individual disks with turbulence inserts inserted between the disks . The upright edges of the disks fit together in a casing. Passages connect the channels formed by the disks in such a way that coolant and oil flow through alternate channels.
Double tube oil coolers and  Double tube oil coolers and  flat tube oil coolers flat tube oil coolers These cooler types are mounted directly in the radiator tank on the outlet side of the main radiator . The radiator tank thus assumes the function of the coolant side housing for the oil coolers. The double tube of the oil cooler is formed by an outer tube and an inner tube inside it with a turbulence insert in between. The two tubes are soldered to each other at the ends. The transmission oil passes through the space between the inner and outer tubes, around or through which already cooled coolant flows.
Double tube coolers are used as transmission oil coolers in passenger cars and commercial vehicle in the lower power segment up to approx. 2.5 kW. As power requirements increase up to 4 kW the double tube is replaced by numerous flat tubes connected to each other by turbulence plates on the coolant side. The flat tubes are interconnected by openings at their ends. The flat tubes are also provided on the oil side with turbulence plates, which are soldered to increase both cooling capacity and strength.
Disk oil coolers Disk oil coolers Disk oil coolers are mounted between the engine block and the oil filter. They have a separate casing and a central channel for the oil to pass through. The oil flowing back from the oil filter is routed through a labyrinth of perforated disks separated by turbulence inserts. This labyrinth is cooled by coolant flowing from the main circuit through the casing.
Forked tube coolers Forked tube coolers Forked tube coolers are made of finned forked tubes through which the coolant flows. On the oil side, they have no casing and must therefore be integrated into the oil filter housing or the oil pan.
, 6 Reinforcement plate, 7 Base plate.
UMC0016Y 1 1 2 2 3   4   5   6   7
Fuel coolers Fuel coolers are installed in modern diesel engines in order to cool excess diesel fuel down to permissible levels. This excess diesel fuel heats up during the injection process as the result of compression in the high pressure pump, before it is routed back via the return line to the fuel tank. The excess diesel fuel that is returned without cooling to the tank has a temperature of well over 70 degC and heats the diesel fuel in the tank. If now the tank were almost empty, the temperature of the diesel fuel in the tank would therefore  exceed the maximum permissible temperature. The excess fuel must therefore be cooled before being introduced into the tank.
The fuel can be cooled by means of an air cooling or coolant cooling system. Coolers operating along similar lines to oil to air coolers or disk stack oil coolers are used to cool fuel.
Modularization Cooling module A cooling module is a structural unit which can consist of various components for cooling .
The design of a cooling module must take into consideration the interaction of the individual components, the dimensioning of the components with respect to the package space in the vehicle, and the procedure for dealing with interfaces. Important factors here are the mounting technology, the cooling air ducts and the seals on the cooling air side, the component connections on the fluid side, and the electrical plug in connections.
1 Transmission oil to coolant cooler, 2 Coolant radiator, 3 Intercooler,  4 Condenser,  5 Air to power steering fluid cooler, 6 Module frame,  7 Module bearing, 8 Electric fan, 9 Double fan cowl, 10 Transmission oil lines.
ducted to examine the flow of cooling air : in the engine compartment, while FEM analyses provide statements concerning the strength and stability of the design layout. The  design analysis phase concludes with verification tests that may also be performed in a wind tunnel and on vibration test rigs.
Cooling system technology While the cooling module comprises a structural unit of components with defined functions, the cooling system encompasses all components that are associated with the functions of the cooling system, even if they do not form complete structural units . This includes for example, beyond the cooling module, lines, pumps, control components, and the expansion tank, if it is not already a component part of the cooling module.
Example architecture with heat exchangers and actuators. 1 Condenser, 2 Coolant radiator, 3 Shutter, 4 Fan,  5 Thermostat, 6 ECU, 7 Electric motor ,  8 Electronically controlled thermostat,  9 Electric motor with pump, 10 Internal combustion engine, 11 Electric motor with pump, 12 Heater core, 13 Stepper motor, 14 Low temperature circuit, 15 Low temperature regulator, 16 Oil cooler, 17 Transmission, 18 Transmission oil cooler. M M M M 1 2 3 4 5 7 8 15 16 17 12 11 18 10 6 9 13 14 UMC0011Y
Intelligent thermal : management Function Future trends are heading toward the system optimized regulation of various heat and substance flows. Thermal management goes beyond cooling system technology in that it takes into consideration all material and heat flow systems in the vehicle, i. e. in addition to the flow structures of the cooling system, it also deals with those of the air conditioning system. The objectives of optimization consist in reducing fuel consumption and exhaust emissions, increasing air conditioning comfort, increasing the service life of components, and improving cooling  capacity in part load states.
Optimization objectives One of the basic principles of thermal management concerns itself with the fact that auxiliary energy employed to operate the cooling system always represents a loss for the vehicle energy balance, and component efficiency cannot be increased arbitrarily at a constant supply of auxiliary energy. To achieve the optimization objectives, the cooling system is therefore equipped with "intelligence", installed in familiar and new types of actuators, as well as in microprocessorcontrolled control systems that operate these actuators. One example is demand triggered regulation of cooling air flow by radiator shutters and controllable fan drives so that cooling air throughout is kept to a minimum under all operating conditions. In addition to improving the  vehicle's drag coefficient cd), this measure also ensures that all media achieve their operating temperature more effectively during the warm up phase after a cold start, and that the passenger compartment is heated more efficiently. Cutting back the use of auxiliary energy in this way means that auxiliary energy can be diverted for use in operating states that are critical to the cooling output, while still achieving the optimization objectives. Another important basic principle is to maintain a constant temperature in the components to be cooled as far as possible, irrespective of the operating state and the ambient conditions. An example of this temperature control principle is to use coolant to regulate the transmission oil temperature. Heating the transmission oil during the warm up phase and employing an efficient cooling system to prevent the transmission oil from overheating  reduce friction losses in the transmission, increase the service life of the transmission, and extend the service intervals for the transmission oil.
Advantages The fuel saving potential based on the sum of all measures is in the range of  approx. 5 % . On top of this, there is a range of further  advantages corresponding to the abovementioned optimization objectives. The extent to which engine management  utilizes the cooling system control options is of decisive significance in leveraging this potential.
In the meantime, individual measures have been implemented to achieve system optimized temperature equalization in motor vehicles. Nevertheless, thermal management as an all encompassing  optimization principle has to date not been fully implemented and remains the reserve of future vehicle generations.
Force feed lubrication system: Heat and wear are produced in engines by the friction of moving parts. Small amounts of residual dirt from production and particulate ingress from the outside are also to be expected in the engine system. The engine system is lubricated with lube oil in order to minimize friction and eliminate or reduce wear and to remove particulates and heat from the engine system.
The force feed lubrication system in combination with splash and oil mist lubrication is the most commonly used system for lubricating motor vehicle engines. An oil pump , while the sliding parts are supplied with lube oil and lubricated by splash lubrication systems and oil mist.
After flowing through the bearing surfaces and sliding parts, the oil collects below the engine in the oil pan. The oil pan is a reservoir where the oil cools, and the foam dissipates and settles. In the meantime an additional oil cooler is used in virtually all engines to regulate the oil temperature. In addition to filtration of the oil, thermal management is of particular importance. Engine service life can be prolonged significantly by keeping the oil clean, i.e. filtration. Oil cooling by means of good thermal management makes possible current technologies such as single or multiple charge air charging and the associated downsizing of engines.
1 Engine lubricating and bearing points, 2 Solenoid valve, 3 Cooler bypass valve, 4 Oil to water heat exchanger, 5 Anti drainback valve, 6 Filter bypass valve, 7 Oil filter, 8 Variable oil pump, 9 Oil pan, 10 Signal from engine control unit, 11 Signal for pressure stage  preselection.
Components: Oil filters Function Function Oil filters remove and reduce particulates  from the engine oil, which could otherwise cause damage or wear in the lubrication circuit. Wear in this context means that the particulates can get between the moving engine components, e.g. between piston and cylinder wall. Here the surfaces can be damaged by the particulates, which in turn can cause scoring or further particulate production. Since the engine oil is constantly circulating in the lubricating oil system, inadequate filtration could cause particulates to accumulate and this would accelerate the rate of wear of components that move against each other. The oil filter does not filter out liquid or soluble constituents such as water, additives or decay products attributed to the effects of oil aging.
housing that cannot be opened and which is secured by means of a threaded stud to the engine block. The complete easychange filter unit is replaced as part of the oil service.
The housing oil filter is made up of a housing that is permanently connected to the engine block and can be opened to access the replaceable filter element. During the oil service, only the filter element is replaced; the housing is a permanent component. The filter element as a rule is based on a metal free design. This means that the filter element can be completely incinerated.
1 Oil to water heat exchanger, 2 Screw cap, 3 Filter bypass valve, 4 Center tube, 5 Filter element, 6 Anti drainback diaphragm, 7 Anti drainback valve, 8 Filter housing.
1 Threaded cap, 2 Filter element, 3 Filter bypass valve, 4 Spring, 5 Seal, 6 Anti drainback diaphragm, 7 Housing 8 Center tube.
Besides the filter element, the two filter : designs normally feature a filter bypass valve, which opens at high differential pressures to ensure effective lubrication at the necessary points in the engine. Typical opening pressures range from 0.8 to 2.5 bar. Elevated differential pressures can occur in connection with high oil viscosities or when the filter element is already heavily fouled.
Depending on the specific engine requirements, the two filter designs may also feature a non return or backflow check valve on the filtered or unfiltered oil side . These valves prevent the oil filter housing from draining empty after the engine is turned off. Currently, the oil and oil filter change intervals for passenger car engines are between 15,000 and 50,000 km, and for commercial vehicles are between 60,000 and 120,000 km very much dependent on the engine system, place of use and the service strategy of the car manufacturer.
Filter media Filter media Various types of deep bed filter media are employed in oil filtration. These are entangled fiber structures  which exist in different configurations. The filter material most commonly used is flat media which, in the majority of cases, is pleated, but in some applications they are also wound or used in the form of fiber packings, especially in bypass oil filters. A mixture of cellulose with synthetic fibers is the most widely used fiber material. The synthetic fiber content can vary markedly depending on the requirements. Alternatively, amounts of glass fibers can be mixed with the cellulose. These filter media are impregnated with resin to enhance their resistance to oil and their operational stability.
1 Oil pan, 2 Oil pump, 3 Pressure control valve, 4 Oil cooler, 5 Bypass oil filter, 6 Throttle, 7 Bypass valve, 8 Full flow oil filter, 9 Engine.
Bypass oil filters: Bypass oil filters Bypass oil filters, designed as deep bed filters or as centrifuges, are used for superfine or microfiltration of the engine oil. These filters remove much finer particles from the oil than is possible using full flow oil filters from the engine is routed via the bypass oil filter.
Thermal management Function Aside from its lubricating function, the engine oil also has the task of transferring or carrying off heat. At the same time the engine oil temperature must not exceed a critical value, as otherwise there is a risk of thermal destruction, so called cracking of the oil.
Oil to water heat exchangers, which are frequently combined with the oil filter module, are used to control the temperature of the oil circuit. This combination allows for a more compact construction and the reduction of interfaces. The primary task is to transfer heat from the oil circuit to the water circuit. The heat energy is then dissipated via this to atmosphere for example with an air to water heat exchanger.
To quickly heat the engine oil after cold starting, the oil to water heat exchanger should only be activated after an increase in temperature in the oil. This can be done by thermostatic valves which are controlled with wax elements or thermo springs. Electric solenoid valves provide for even better control options.
Oil to water heat exchanger The preferred design for an oil to water heat exchanger is with plates stacked on top of one another. Oil and water flow alternately through the chambers. The heat is transferred via the plates to the neighboring fluid. To achieve high heat transfer rates the flow in the columns should be as turbulent as possible. Structures are introduced into the heat transfer plates or turbulence plates installed in the column for this purpose.
________________________________ References References ISO 4548 12: Methods of test for full flow lubricating oil filters for internal combustion engines Part 12: Filtration efficiency using particle counting and contaminant retention capacity.
Overview: Functions The air intake system and the intake manifold are designed to supply the engine with air that is as cold and particlefree as possible, and to distribute this air to the individual cylinders. The main functions of the air intake system are to direct the air from the front of the vehicle to the engine, to separate particulates contained in the intake air from the surrounding area, and to muffle the noises emitted by the engine.
Components Basic functions Basic functions The air intake system consists of an air duct on the raw air side, the air filter as the central components, and the lines to which the throttle valve and the intake manifold are connected. The intake manifold distributes the intake air to the individual cylinders and ensures uniform and effective combustion. The air filter prevents mineral dust and particles from being drawn into the engine and contaminating the engine oil. This reduces wear in the bearings, piston rings, cylinder walls, etc. In this way the individual system  components can have a crucial positive effect on the performance and service life of the engine.
Supplementary functions Supplementary functions The air intake system often incorporates further function components such as, for example, sensors , HC adsorber, water separator, and even anti snow systems.
1 Raw air line, 2 Air filter housing, 3 Clean air line 1 , 10 Throttle valve, 11 Attachment points.
Requirements: Functional requirements Functional requirements The development of the air intake system and its components is based on numerous specifications which are shaped on the one hand by space considerations and on the other hand by functional  requirements. Specifications define for example temperatures in the engine compartment which influence the choice of plastic materials and elastomers for the individual components, permissible leakage rates and pressure losses for the system or the individual components, the acoustic performance of the intake tract, and the separation performance with  regard to filtration as service life and as filtration efficiency requirement.
With regard to the intake manifold, further emphasis is placed on pressure pulsation resistance and the level of uniform distribution of intake air. The air flow into the combustion chamber can if necessary be positively influenced by different types of flap. Visual appearance Visual appearance The visual appearance and the design of surfaces in the engine compartment gain in importance as soon as surfaces are located in the visible area of the engine compartment .
Passenger car  air intake system Air duct The intake point of the raw air line is usually located at the front of the vehicle. It is particularly important in that it has a crucial influence on the ingress of particles and the unwanted ingress of water droplets when it is raining and of snow crystals when it is snowing. However, this position is generally stipulated by the automobile manufacturers.
Classic internal combustion engines are divided into non supercharged naturally aspirated engines and supercharged engines, in which an exhaust gas turbocharger for example is deployed. The airintake system and by optimized flow routing. The lines are usually made of plastic and elastomer materials, while the airfilter housings are generally injectedmolded plastic parts. Depending on the application, the air filter can be mounted to the body and to the engine in such a way that the lines compensate not only the tolerances between the components and their attachment points, but also above all the movement of the engine relative to the body. The components are joined with vibration isolation to the vehicle by way of rubber buffers.
Air filtration Engine air intake filters reduce the particles contained in the intake air which can be generated for example by abrasion and incomplete combustion or condensation processes or are even of natural origin in the form of organic and mineral dust.
1 Raw air housing, 2 Air filter element, 3 Clean air hood, 4 Flow deflectors, 5 Raw air connection, 6 Clean air connection. UMM0705 1Y 1 2 3 6 5 4
Composition of air pollutants: Composition of air pollutants Typical air pollutants includes oil mist, aerosols, diesel soot, industrial waste gases, pollen, and dust. These particles vary greatly in size. The dust particles drawn in together with the intake air have a diameter of between 0.01 um are between 5 um and 100 um.
The amount of dust contained in the intake air depends heavily on the environment in which the vehicle is used . In extreme cases, over a period of ten years, the mass concentration accumulated in a passenger car can range between a few grams through to several kilograms of dust.
Filter elements Filter elements Filter elements which incorporate the  latest technology achieve total mass  filtration rates of up to 99.8 %. It is necessary to maintain these values under all prevailing conditions also under dynamic conditions as found in the engine's intake tract. Poor quality filters will exhibit an increased rate of dust breakdown or rupture.
Design Design Filter elements are designed to meet the requirements of each individual type of engine. This ensures that pressure losses remain minimal and that high levels of  filtration efficiency are not dependent on air throughput. The filter medium that makes up the filter elements in flat or cylindrical filters is installed in folded or pleated layers in order to achieve a maximum filter surface area in the smallest possible space . Conical, oval, stepped, as well as trapezoidal geometries complement the standard structures with the aim of optimizing the use of package space that is becoming very scarce and confined in the engine compartment. These media, mostly consisting of cellulose fibers, go through a special embossing and impregnation process to achieve the necessary mechanical and thermal strength, sufficient water stability, and resistance to chemicals. Newer applications are equipped with flameinhibiting filter media to reduce the risk of fire caused for example by an drawn in cigarette.
The elements are designed in accordance with the spacings and replacement intervals defined by the vehicle manufacturer. The intervals are between two and four, and sometimes even six years, or 30,000 km up to 100,000 km.
The demands for compact, high perfor : mance filter elements , as well as longer service  intervals, are the driving force behind the development of new, innovative air filter media. To further increase the dust retention capacity of deep bed filters, design engineers are increasingly using media which have a gradient structure with  increasing fiber density to the clean air side.
Fully synthetic filter media Fully synthetic filter media New air filter media consisting of synthetic fibers with much improved performance data have already been phased into  series production. Figure 4 shows a photograph of a synthetic high performance filter medium with continuously  increasing density and decreasing fiber diameter across the filter section from the input side to the output side.
Semi synthetic filter media Semi synthetic filter media Better results than with purely cellulosebased media can be achieved using composite materials. Here, for example, a cellulose based paper layer is combined with a synthetic layer of melt blown fibers. The melt blown fibers constitute a layer of fibers formed from a polymer melt in the air flow which is either deposited directly on the paper layer or laminated on in a separate process step as a separate layer.
with different resonator shapes a) Resonator type muffler .
were confined to designing a sufficiently : sized air filter housing as an intake  muffler. In the meantime the excitation spectrum has shifted from low frequencies to medium to high  frequencies with the result that separate measures in the form of Helmholtz resonators and l/4 pipes are used. Computer simulation programs that determine the optimum number of resonators and their frequency are used to design these  measures.
quency of a chamber is determined by the chamber volume and the degree of perforation; a wide band muffling effect is achieved by arranging several chambers in succession. Here too modern simulation programs are used to optimize the number.
In addition to resonator type mufflers, absorption type mufflers as featured in exhaust systems are occasionally used. HC adsorption For the Californian market and some other US states limits regarding the emission of highly volatile hydrocarbons are defined for vehicles within the framework of a multiple stage regulation. The engine manufacturers must comply with these statutory provisions and adhere to time limits after which engines must feature pollutant emission reducing technologies to satisfy the emission standards.
Some of the unburned hydrocarbons  or in a bypass configuration. Unlike air filter elements, adsorber elements according to the requirements are lifetime components which may not be removed from the system. The elements are charged while the engine is stopped with the air borne hydrocarbons of minimal droplet size, and desorption takes place the next time the engine is operated, i. e. the hydrocarbons are returned to the combustion process in this cycle and the HC adsorber is regenerated for the next charging cycle. The adsorptive medium used is activated carbon, which is located as a single or double layer between the carrier media. These are for the most part elements which are manufactured in a process as plastic coating.
Water separation When driving in the rain, not inconsiderable amounts of water may be drawn in, depending on the position and layout of the intake fitting at the front of the vehicle. Because the filter medium only has a  limited water absorption capacity, the drawn in liquid may reach the clean air side of the system after a certain time. Signal deviations or even damage to the hot film air mass meter may occur if droplets touch the hot sensor surface and  result in a local, unwanted cooling of this surface. The signal deviation suggests an incorrect air mass flow and gives rise to an incorrect setting of the mixture composition, to power losses, and ultimately to increased consumption (and increased
to the filter element the more difficult the task. Essentially, the aim is to achieve  additional flow pressure losses that are as low as possible. The measures must be  combined with suitable water discharge devices which divert the separated water from the system to atmosphere. However, separating principles are also used which carry the liquid in combination with measures on the housing side and with  additional water separating fleeces attached to the filter element from the system. An optimized design of the raw air line and the air filter housing clearly enhance the above mentioned measures such that outstanding separation results are achieved even with comparatively short raw air lines.
1 Raw air intake, 2 Raw air line, 3 Water droplets, 4 Swirl generator , 5 Wall applied water film, 6 Peeling collar, 7 Water discharge.
1 Raw air,  2 Clean air,  3 Air filter element, 4 Fleece on raw air side, 5 Dry chamber,  6 Bypass valve, 7 Snow block.
air filter on the raw air side. The filter ele : ment is basically fitted with a preliminary fleece which assumes the sealing function and protects the "dry" chamber of the second intake against snow ingress.
Sensor technology Sensors which measure the pressure, the temperature and even the air mass flow are often integrated on the clean air side of the air filter. The exhaust gas relevant air mass flow is measured by a hot film air mass meter. As the emission control legislation is tightened the requirements with regarding to signal quality are becoming increasingly stringent. Signal  deviations for an air filter system in the range of +2.5 % are difficult to achieve, but not unusual. This requires an increased simulation outlay to identify  disruptive turbulent areas and instabilities in the flow close to the sensor and to minimize them by means of suitable product design and additional measures or components .
Visual design of surfaces The structuring of plastic surfaces in the visible area called for by customers for  visual reasons can be achieved in a variety of ways, such as for example by  erosion, blasting or photoetching of the injection molding die. Engine mounted design air filters are a special example here.
Interfaces The type of connection point between the air filter housing and the clean air line is often geared towards customer requirements. The production plant of the automobile manufacturer often specifies the shape of the interface. If an elastomer component is called for, lines based on the material PP EPDM with integrated bellows for isolation are manufactured by injection molding. These can be connected to a line section made using blown part technology.
Crankcase ventilation Crankcase ventilation The clean air line on the low pressure side can incorporate further interfaces such as for example the blow by introduction point from the crankcase ventilation or even the extraction point for the PCV . The blowby introduction point is frequently fitted with a heating tube which is intended to prevent icing.
of the hot film air mass meter 1 Raw air connection, 2 Air filter element, 3 Deflector geometry, 4 Rectifying grill, 5 Hot film air mass meter, 6 Clean air connection, 7 Flow direction.
design including mixing of air with ex : haust gas. For special operating points in the part load range an additional  pressure drop is generated in the EGR system by an exhaust gas restrictor  which can be produced at exhaust gas temperatures below 85 degC.
The use of low pressure exhaust gas recirculation is being analyzed even in gasoline engines; however, the objectives here are to reduce CO2 and the knock tendency rather than to reduce NOx emissions. The first applications in series production are expected in the next few years.
Validation of air filter Full product validation, consisting of simulation, acoustics and component testing, is an essential part of the development process for air filter systems in order to achieve a high degree of product maturity as early as possible. Already in the early concept phase within the framework of virtual product validation simulations are conducted to optimize the functions and properties of air filter systems. Here the acoustic properties such as intake opening noise and surface sound radiation are calculated and optimized.
As well as acoustic behavior the fluid properties such as pressure loss and  approaching flow to the measuring sensor system are analyzed and specifically improved. In addition, the vibration characteristics are tested under roadway or engine excitation using finite element simulations to fulfill the later life test without any problems. The filtration properties among others are checked as soon as the first sample components are available. The scope of testing within the framework of component testing includes tests on individual components and on the complete system. This is rounded off by functional tests where the ambient conditions prevailing in the vehicle  are superimposed.
The component life is tested in comprehensive vibration and pulsation tests which simulate the real load in the vehicle. In view of the strict emission control legislation, the flow behavior in the air filter must also be very closely analyzed with a dust charge also taken into consideration.  Influencing factors such as fold/pleat  geometry of the air filter element and spread of the filter medium are taken into consideration here. Component validation is rounded off by simulations of the  injection molding process to optimize component quality and the manufacturing process.
Trends further development  of air intake systems Three main trends can currently be observed in the market: Downsizing of  engines, platform strategies to utilize  synergy effects, and stricter requirements with regard to emission control legislation. Downsizing necessitates a higher proportion of supercharged engines with the following effects: Specifically higher airmass flows, smaller and more complex air filter housings, increased conflict  between acoustics and pressure loss, higher temperatures in the engine compartment, and higher charge air pressures. This necessitates a higher simulation  outlay for example to optimize flow and acoustics, new air filter media, innovative filter element designs, and higher quality plastic materials.
with regard to emission control legisla : tion give rise to heightened specifications with regard to sensor technology, particularly the quality of the signal stability of the hot film air mass meter. This likewise  necessitates more complex simulation tools, new test procedures, and more complex product designs and constructions.
fluous, and result on the one hand in  reduced costs and on the other hand in increased service friendliness when  replacing the filter element. The two housing sections can be connected to each other by injected snap on hooks.
Hybrid vehicles  and active noise measures In the years to come hybridization in the automotive industry will present new challenges. Switches in operation between the internal combustion engine and the electric motor, but also purely electric  operation generate unusual acoustic states. Active systems constitute an interesting remedial measure in that the can not only reduce noise and thus replace passive components, but also create new degrees of freedom with regard to noise generation, e. g. for warning pedestrians in purely electric operation. Some countries have already initiated legal initiatives prescribing a warning function for purely electric operation. There are also opportunities to support a specific marque sound or for noise control in order to acoustically mask unwanted phenomena. This approach makes active systems interesting for future engine concepts.
Passenger car : intake manifolds The main function of the intake manifold is to distribute the air homogeneously to the individual cylinders in order to ensure combustion that is as uniform and effective as possible in the individual cylinders. The quality of uniform distribution has a decisive effect on the engine's performance and emission characteristics.
In the case of gasoline engines a distinction is made between naturally aspirated engines and supercharged engines; in the case of diesel engines, on the other hand, only supercharged engines are still relevant. All three categories feature both passive and active intake manifolds.  Active intake manifolds are usually called variable induction systems.
Intake manifolds  for naturally aspirated engines In these types of intake manifolds gasdynamic supercharging effects are used to increase the air mass in the cylinder and thus the engine output or torque. There are two different supercharging  effects here.
Ram tube supercharging Ram tube supercharging Ram tube supercharging is based on the principle that each cylinder has its own ram tube that feeds into a common  plenum chamber, also called the intake plenum .
a) Intake manifold geometry with changeover flap closed . 1 Changeover flap,  2 Plenum chamber,  3 Long, thin oscillatory intake  passage with changeover  flap closed, 4 Short, wide oscillatory  intake passage with  changeover flap open.
would be an infinitely variable induction : system in which an optimum ram tube length is assigned to each engine speed range. But this is barely feasible, both technically and economically. For this reason mostly twoor in rare cases also three stage induction systems are on the market.
Tuned intake tube charging Tuned intake tube charging Tuned intake tube charging is based on the principles of a Helmholtz resonator. Two groups of cylinders with the same  ignition interval are established. The reason for this is that the intake pulses within the groups must not overlap. These groups are connected by short intake manifolds to the two resonance chambers .
Incorporating a resonance flap between the two resonance chambers creates an active system that provides further advantages. The intake manifold with closed resonance flap generates a torque increase in the lower engine speed range. In the upper speed range this valve is opened to create an intake manifold with short ram tubes which increases power output in this speed range.
Intake manifolds  for supercharged gasoline engines Intake manifolds for supercharged gasoline engines are in most cases passive intake manifolds. Power and torque are primarily determined via the charge air pressure generated by the charger and thus by the air mass introduced into the cylinders. The still available, but mostly very short ram tubes are typically used for passive intake manifolds.
a) Resonance induction system, b) Resonance variable induction system. 1 Cylinder, 2 Short intake manifold, 3 Resonance chamber,  4 Resonance tube, 5 Plenum chamber ,  6 Throttle valve, 7 Resonance flap.
and generates a cylinder flow about the : horizontal axis . In the power  setting the flap is opened and the engine receives through the opening cross section as much air mass as possible into the cylinder.
A special form here is the trough flap, which in the open setting disappears completely into the duct wall and thus ensures unrestricted flow into the cylinder.
Intake manifolds  for supercharged diesel engines In the case of intake manifolds for supercharged diesel engines there is no such clear distinction between passive and active variants. These intake manifolds practically do not have manifolds any more. All that remain are short inlet tulips that  connect the intake plenum to the cylinder head.
duct in part load operation and thus cre : ate a pronounced swirl about the vertical axis. This swirl ensures that air and fuel are thoroughly mixed and thereby helps to reduce emissions. In the transition to full load operation the flap is then opened incrementally and the swirl is nullified by the filling duct. This results in as much air mass as possible being delivered to the cylinder and thus in high torque and high power output.
Electric actuators Electric actuators Electric actuators are preferably used to activate swirl flaps in diesel engines. They enable any intermediate settings to be accurately and rapidly approached. Control is provided in most cases by the engine ECU.
Vacuum units A vacuum unit can be used for pure twopoint switchings, as are sufficient for length, resonance, and tumble switchings. These are switched by means of an electric changeover valve. The prerequisite is that the engine or a vacuum pump makes sufficient vacuum available.
Sensor technology Sensor technology The sensor technology that features in variable induction systems has increased significantly in response to the OBD II legislation, which states that all exhaustgas relevant switching organs must be monitored by the engine ECU and that the driver must be alerted if they malfunction. Exhaust gas relevant switching elements are the turbulence flaps . Switching elements for length or resonance switching are not included. For electric actuators the internal angleof rotation sensors of the actuators can be used in most cases. For vacuum units a separate sensor is required, but this can also be integrated in the vacuum unit. For active intake manifolds, in addition to the sensor technology for angle of rotation monitoring, pressure, temperature, or combined pressure/temperature sensors are mounted on the intake manifolds. These are necessary to supply the engine ECU with the information from the intake manifold required for combustion.
Introduction of gases A further function of the intake manifold is to distribute introduced gases uniformly into the respective cylinders. In gasoline engines these are primarily crankcaseventilation and tank ventilation gases.  Fittings are attached to the intake manifold for these gases and then connected by the engine manufacturer to the relevant hoses. When crankcase blow by gases are introduced, an additional heating tube may be required to avoid icing.
In diesel engines it is important for high pressure exhaust gas recirculation to be correctly introduced. Often uncooled exhaust gas is introduced into the intake manifold during the cold start phase or diesel particulate filter regeneration. Suitable shielding measures must be taken here where plastic intake manifolds are used. A central introduction point with  adequate mixing section is beneficial to the extremely important uniform distribution here. The uniform distribution requirement is very difficult to achieve in cylinder selective introduction systems where the gas to be introduced at the very different operating points in the engine map.
Gaskets: A trend towards higher quality materials can be discerned in gaskets. This is mainly because low pressure exhaust gas recirculation is more frequently used in  diesel engines and this results in an  aggressive condensate in the induction system. Peroxide cured fluorocarbon  rubber, for example, must be used in such applications. Due to the fact that the operating temperatures can extend both up and down, sometimes special low temperature materials are required.
Validation of intake manifolds Virtual and experimental product validation plays an increasingly important role for the intake manifold. The foundations for a flow and weight optimized component are already laid in the early development phase by the close interplay between design, testing and simulation. The optimum uniform distribution of air to the individual cylinders is optimized by CFD simulations in a number of iterative loops. The intake manifold geometry is optimized with the aid of FEM simulations in such a way that maximum rigidity and strength are achieved with minimum weight. This enables the use of materials for the component to be kept as minimal as possible. The manufacturability of the component is analyzed and optimized with the aid of injection molding simulations.
These theoretical analyses are then verified on sample and standard parts. The uniform distribution of intake air to the individual cylinders is measured on a flowrate test rig. The structural strength of the components is ensured by rigorous pressure pulsation and vibration tests under temperature influence. In the case of variable induction systems the durability of the switch over elements and actuators is substantiated with endurance and fatigue tests.
Development trends  for intake manifolds Due to the switch from direct to indirect intercooling and the resulting benefits with regard to CO2 emissions, the main trend in the intake manifold market is towards the integration of intercoolers.
This trend has above all an effect on the intake manifolds in supercharged gasoline engines. Virtually all manufacturers pursue solutions involving full integration of the intercooler in the induction system. The cuboid shaped intercooler must be integrated in the plastic intake manifold and, despite the large flat surfaces and sometimes for plastic extremely high temperatures , satisfy the requirements with regard to pressure pulsation resistance. Materials that meet these requirements are currently in development.
The diesel engine market is split two ways: firstly the intercooler directly integrated in the intake manifold, and secondly the arrangement of the intercooler as a "single box" upstream of the throttle valve.
However, they do have the following particularities in terms of design: While in passenger car applications one joint throttle valve is for the most part used for a number of cylinders . Comparable intake manifold configurations are used in passenger car engines, e.g., in racing engines.
Commercial vehicle  air intake system Air duct The design of the air intake system for commercial vehicles is essentially comparable to that of passenger car air intake systems . What must be taken into account here is the much higher service life of commercial vehicles, the higher rated volumetric flow, and the broad range of uses in local, long distance and construction site applications. The different volumes and types of dust must be taken into account in filter design.
Raw air duct, air filters and clean air pipes up to the turbocharger are made of thermoplastics. After the turbocharger for the most part come .
Raw air intake The positioning of the intake point is  extremely important. A roof or side intake is usually chosen on heavy commercial vehicles. Both are generally mounted with rubber mounts for acoustic isolation to the cab rear wall. The dust and water concentrations in the air are lowest with the roof intake. There are however many raw air duct variants to cater for the different driver's cab heights and widths. A good compromise in terms of costs is the side intake : Here air is still inducted from height at the side rear of the driver's cab, irrespective of the different roof heights.
A low height front intake or side intake, along similar lines to that used in passenger cars, is usually chosen for light utility vehicles. To keep the volumes of inducted dust a water in check, air is inducted through baffles on the vehicle sides. An air duct that delivers the best flow possible must be provided in all cases. Hot engine waste air must not be inducted as this mean a performance drop and higher fuel consumption.
to the rest of the system. The function of : the bellows is to seal the interface when the cab is tilted back and to compensate the vibrating motion of the sprung cab. Water separation Measures for water separation are integrated in the raw air system. Water separation prevents dust from being washed through the filter medium, which can  increase engine wear, but also cause sensors to malfunction. Because as a rule cellulose based filter media are used, at worst the filter element may be destroyed. Measures for water separation include for example using a large intake cross section to reduce the intake velocity so that basically as little water as possible is inducted. Baffles in the system cause the water droplets in the intake air to be thrown against the inner manifold walls, where they form a film. The water droplets are then separated via a peeling collar or a change in volume and discharged via a water discharge valve.
Dust preseparation In vehicle applications with a higher dust concentration in the air , which rectifies the air flow again, to the air filter.
of the turbocharger 1 Inlet grill, 2 Raw air duct with side intake behind the driver's cab, 3 Water discharge valve, 4 Bellows, 5 Rubber elbow,  6 Maintenance switch, 7 Screw clamp, 8 Clean air pipe, 9 Connection to turbocharger, 10 Air filter, 11 Direction of travel.
low pressure loss, high dust capacity, and : thus long service intervals. Depending on how they are used, they can extend a typical oil change interval by a factor of two. A further advantage of round filters is that they can also be fashioned as two stage filters. In these variations dust separation takes place inside the air filter itself . The tangential air inlet generates a swirl in the housing which separates out the coarse particles.
Depending on the application, different filter media are available today which are optimized for example for maximum filtration efficiency of fine dust and soot. A safety element is optionally fitted inside the main filter element which prevents dust from reaching the clean air side during servicing. It also protects the engine even if the main filter element has been damaged during servicing. Basically, however, air filter elements should be replaced and not cleaned.
Clean air line as connection  to the turbocharger The clean air line is as a rule a combination of metal, plastic, and rubber parts. Sensors for air mass, vacuum and air moisture can be optionally integrated. It is important for all the interfaces on the clean air side to be permanently tight. The vacuum switch indicates to the driver that the servicing limit for the filter element has been reached. Flexible rubber connections compensate the relative movement between the engine and the framemounted air filter.
Air filtration Filter elements which incorporate the latest technology achieve total mass filtration rates of up to 99.95 %. Because the service life of a commercial vehicle engine far outstrips that of a passenger car  engine, the filtration efficiency requirements are greater accordingly.
The filter elements have to be replaced at the intervals specified by the vehicle  manufacturer. Usual replacement intervals are, depending on the application, 40,000 to 320,000 km or two years. In most cases a service interval indicator monitors when the service interval is reached.
The media used in commercial vehicle air filters are comparable to filter media in passenger cars, but are characterized by higher filtration efficiency and are usually designed as surface type filters. The separated particles thus precipitate mainly on the surface of the cellulosebased medium.
ultrathin, synthetic fibers with diameters of : just 30 to 40 nm are applied to a relatively coarse backing layer of cellulose. The  filtration efficiency figures improved in this way enable such systems to satisfy the constantly increasing requirements of the commercial vehicle manufacturers  regarding the protection of sensors, turbochargers and other components, and by protecting these components help to  comply with the ever more stringent  exhaust emissions standards.
Further development The space allotted to the air intake system is becoming increasingly limited, particularly due to the comprehensive exhaustgas treatment system. For this reason, there will in future also be air filters that are flatter than round filters. This opens up the possibility of new installation positions in the vehicle, for example in front of the front wheel or underneath the driver's cab.
Commercial vehicle  intake manifolds Supercharged diesel engines require one intake manifold, usually referred to simply as a boost manifold. The air passes through the air filter to the turbocharger, and from there through the intercooler to the boost manifold. This distributes the air to the cylinders. For the most part the valve for EGR introduction and possibly an electric auxiliary heater are flange mounted at the inlet. The auxiliary heater helps to reach the required exhaust gas values as quickly as possible during engine starting. The introduced exhaust gas is mixed with the fresh air in the boost manifold and distributed as uniformly as possible to all the cylinders. The exhaust gas cooled by the EGR cooler contains, depending on the operating state and EGR rate, sulfurous acid and soot. The aluminum used for the boost manifold must be protected against the acid by for example painting. If the boost manifold is made of plastic, the plastic must be chosen so that temperature, charge air pressure and acid do not damage the components over their service lives. The same requirements also apply to the flange gaskets.
as a single plastic injection molded part and also parts which due to their more complex geometry are manufactured in two parts and welded. Charge air pressure, size of the part and tolerances must be taken into account when configuring the welding. The use of plastic also contributes to the lightweight construction of the engine.
Turbochargers and superchargers for inter : nal combustion engines increase the airmass flow for a given engine displacement and a given engine speed, thereby increasing the power density. These "compressors" are generally systematically divided into three different types: the mechanically driven supercharger, the exhaust gas turbocharger, and the pressure wave supercharger.
In the case of the exhaust gas turbocharger , the drive power is generated after banking up the exhaust gas through expansion of the exhaust gas, by which part of the exhaust gas energy is used. The exhaust gas turbocharger has gained acceptance for use in diesel engines in both the automobile and commercial vehicle sectors. The exhaust gas turbocharger, particularly in conjunction with gasoline direction injection, is being increasingly used in gasoline engines as well. But mechanically driven superchargers directly coupled to the crankshaft are also used in some vehicle models with gasoline engines. Pressure wave superchargers on the other hand, despite having some benefits, did not enjoy widespread use in the automotive sector; only a few vehicle models were equipped with these superchargers in the 1980s and 1990s.
1 Compressed air outlet, 2 Compressor impeller, 3 Shaft, 4 Exhaust gas turbine, 5 Fresh air inlet, 6 Actuator with control rack for actuating  the wastegate, 7 Exhaust gas  mass flow intake, 8 Wastegate  , 9 Outlet, exhaust gas mass flow.
Roots supercharger Roots supercharger The Roots supercharger is a rotary piston machine with contra rotating twinor multibladed rotary pistons mounted in rolling bearings and synchronized by a gear set. The rotary pistons mesh at identical speed without directly contacting each other in the housing . The gaps between these components essentially determine the machine's efficiency.
and design limits the pressure ratios that : can be achieved to levels below 2. Coating the functional components has helped to improve efficiency. Current development work is focused on among other things variable speed gearboxes on the drive side. Screw type supercharger Screw type supercharger The screw type supercharger . In order to minimize internal leakage losses, the tolerances between the screws and the walls must be very closely adhered to. Measures along similar lines to the Roots supercharger were implemented for improving the function and efficiency of this type of supercharger.
Current developments are focused on the integration of electric drives primarily for fuel cell applications. In addition to electric only assemblies there are also variants with a power split between mechanical and electric drive.
Spiral type supercharger Spiral type supercharger The spiral type supercharger is an example of this type. Maintaining very tight tolerances and the seal has a function determining effect. Radial sealing is provided by the narrowest gaps possible, axial sealing by touching sealing strips inserted on the end faces. These sealing strips are subject to wear and are if necessary replaced during regular vehicle servicing. Internal compression can be achieved by an appropriate configuration of spirals.
a spiral type supercharger 1 Air inlet into second working chamber, 2 Drive shaft, 3 Displacer element, 4 Air inlet into primary working chamber, 5 Housing, 6 Displacer element.
Exhaust gas turbochargers: Of all the supercharger units in use, the exhaust gas turbocharger is by far the most widespread. While nowadays virtually 100 % of passenger car and commercial vehicle diesel engines are turbocharged, the proportion of supercharged gasoline engines will continue to increase dramatically in the next few years. Here, too, the exhaust gas turbocharger will be the dominant supercharger.
of a turbine engine is based physically on the principle of momentum. The turbine converts some of the enthalpy contained in the exhaust gas into mechanical energy to drive the compressor. The compressor draws in fresh air through the air filter and compresses it.
The exhaust gas turbocharger is coupled only thermodynamically, not mechanically, to the engine. Turbocharger speed does not depend on engine speed, but is rather a function of the balance of drive energy between the turbine and the compressor. The turbine generates the compressor output and the output which is essentially used up in the bearings and ultimately dissipated as heat .
Applications The exhaust gas turbocharger in its present form can trace its roots back to the work of Alfred Buchi . Exhaust gas turbochargers have traditionally been used for the purpose of supercharging large diesel engines, originally being used primarily for commercial vehicle, marine and locomotive power plants as well as for agriculturaland construction machinery applications.
1 Compressor housing,  2 Compressor impeller, 3 Turbine housing,  4 Turbine wheel,  5 Bearing housing,  6 Incoming exhaust gas,  7 Outgoing exhaust gas,  8 Atmospheric fresh air,  9 Precompressed fresh air, 10 Oil supply, 11 Oil return.
introduction of direct injection .
Use in passenger cars with gasoline Use in passenger cars with gasoline engines engines Exhaust gas turbocharging of gasoline engines was originally the reserve of only high output sports engines for increased performance and, because of inadequate driveability , thus positively influencing package space and fuel consumption.
In contrast to diesel engines, mechanical supercharging was also employed and today continues to be employed occasionally on gasoline engines on account of the excellent transient build up of boost pressure. With the introduction of direct injection in the gasoline engine the exhaust gas turbocharger was almost on a par with mechanically driven superchargers thanks to the use of scavenging.
In addition, a combination of mechanical supercharging and exhaust gas turbocharging was in the past employed to provide small capacity gasoline engines with high rated output and high torque at a comparatively low specific speed. However, the current trend is towards the use of electrically driven supplementary compressors instead of combination supercharging.
The exhaust gas turbocharger with variable turbine geometry is today the standard supercharger used in diesel engines. In the past this technology was only used on gasoline engines in niche applications due to the unmastered, thermal and technical requirements and the simultaneously high component costs. Current high volume applications, however, are showing a trend reversal with regard to this issue, which was instigated by the series launch of the 96 kW engine version of the Volkswagen EA211 evo. The technical suitability of the turbocharger with variable turbine geometry is matched to a low emission Miller combustion process without valve overlap with a simultaneously increased compression ratio. In the first generation the exhaust gas temperature is limited to 880 degC. However, current developments cover exhaust gas temperatures up to 1050 degC.
With regard to the statutory exhaust emission and consumption guidelines and the existing performance figures required by customers, the importance of exhaust gas turbocharging to the reduced capacity and reduced cylinder engines currently in development cannot be underestimated. At present the number of turbocharged gasoline engines is increasing. The growth of this market segment is expected to continue over the coming years.
Bearing housing Bearing housing The bearing housing accommodates the bearings and the elements for sealing the shaft. State of the art designs usually feature a specially developed friction bearing both in the radial as well as the axial bearing assembly. The radial bearings are designed either as rotating double plain bushings or as stationary plain bearing bushings. The thrust bearing in conventional designs is made up of a multiple spline surface bushing that is subject to load from both sides.
Lubricating oil supply: The lubricating oil is supplied by connecting the turbocharger to the engine's oil circuit. The oil outlet is connected directly to the oil pan in the crankcase. Today, this type of bearing assembly is used to control rotational speeds of more than 300,000 rpm reliably. Bearing arrangement A rolling bearing rotor assembly can deliver consumption related efficiency advantages which provide for a better transient build up of boost pressure and higher boost pressures in the part load range. However, this trend is currently falling off because significant improvements could not be achieved with the evolutionary development of the conventional, hydrodynamic bearing version. Modern developments have a reduced friction loss with simultaneously very good acoustic properties, as demonstrated by for example the "3D Bearing" from BMTS Technology GmbH and the "Z Bearing" from Garrett Motion AG. However, rolling bearing rotor assemblies also feature in series production in the passenger car sector. For deeper market penetration, however, further developments with regard to costs, acoustics and service life are necessary. In the commercial vehicle sector wider deployment is expected in long distance haulage now that the tendency to wear of the rolling elements has been sufficiently reduced.
Sealing To seal off the oil chamber to the exterior and to minimize the entry of charge air  and exhaust gas to the charger interior, the shaft is equipped at the casing openings with piston rings which are tensioned in the bearing housing and with the shaft groove form a simple labyrinth. The state of the art sealing technology used today limits the permissible installation location for the exhaust gas turbocharger to a comparatively small range of inclination. Touching seals would be useful in this respect, but have not been able to be produced up to now at reasonable cost owing to the high relative speeds between shaft and housing.
Cooling No additional cooling measures are necessary to maintain efficient operation of the bearing assemblies under suitable ambient conditions in the engine compartment, i.e., at exhaust gas temperatures in conventional passenger car usage up to 830 degC. The relevant temperatures can generally be maintained below critical levels using devices such as a heat shield, and by thermally isolating the hot turbine housing, supplemented by incorporating suitable design elements in the bearing housing itself. Water cooled bearing housings are employed for higher temperatures, for example, on gasoline engines operating at up to 1080 degC exhaust gas temperature or in certain diesel engine applications.
Compressor Compressor The compressor assembly in passenger car and commercial vehicle applications consists of an axial inflow and radial outflow impeller and a generally guidering free compressor housing made of cast aluminum. However, the use of guide rings is only practical if a limited mass flow spread of the engine operation curve can be applied without driveability limitations. The are primarily suitable for applications with high compressor pressure conditions. The flow is further slowed down in the housing, in the course of which some of the pressure build up occurs. Having the smallest possible contour gap between the impeller and the housing is crucially important to efficiency.
Compressor impeller: The compressor impeller can be mass produced in a special casting process from an aluminum alloy. Today, however, impellers milled from an aluminum forging alloy are mainly used. In the event of more rigorous service life requirements, particularly in the commercial vehicle sector with critical application profiles, impellers milled from a titanium alloy are also used. Aside from cost intensive titanium alloys, aluminum lithium alloys are among the preferred materials. For engines with low pressureside exhaust gas recirculation, where the compressor has to deliver medium containing exhaust gas, the compressor impeller is provided with a coating. This protects the compressor impeller against erosion by particulate and droplet impingement. Although the compressor impeller contributes much less than the turbine wheel to the rotor assembly's mass moment of inertia, a value which is as low as possible is also important on the cold side. Because of the heightened requirements with regard to performance and service life, attempts to mass produce plastic compressor impellers for turbocharger use have hitherto failed.
Compressor program map The characteristic of a compressor is described by a program map the choke limit restricts the operating range. The surge limit is defined as the transition from the stable to the unstable operating range. The stability limit is dependent on the vibrational dynamics of the entire conduit system in which the compressor stage is operated. If the stability limit is undershot, delivery of the air mass flow is as a rule periodically interrupted and re established. The extent of the surge limit can therefore be improved among other things by means of a suitable intake line design. The position of the surge limit is therefore not a compressor property, but rather a system property. The choke limit describes the throughput limit of a flow compressor which occurs when transonic flow velocities are reached at the narrowest compressor cross section. The choke limit is characterized by steeply falling speed curves.
u Peripheral velocity, p1 Total pressure at compressor inlet, p2 Total pressure at compressor outlet. The volumetric flow factor  is a dimensionless volumetric flow.
UMM0515 2E 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 1 2 3 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 Volumetric flow factor ph Pressure ratio p2 /p1 Marin craft Truck Passenger cars Surge limit
The aerodynamic properties of the compressor stage are determined by the geometric properties of the compressor impeller, the diffuser, and the spiral housing. Furthermore, the compressor impeller must have a suitable mechanical design. The for the most part compromised geometric design is necessary to ensure safety again the failure modes that occur. Damage is caused by high frequency oscillation excitations and tensile loads and shear stresses resulting from the underlying, application specific speed horizon which act on the impeller geometries.
With the appropriate, technical requirement, recirculation channels integrated into the compressor housing or a special form of compressor inlet channel are used to extend and stabilize the compressor program map.
Recirculation channel The recirculation channel at suitable operating points directs some of the delivered mass flow back to the compressor inlet and thereby changes the flow condition at the compressor impeller. With suitable compressor impellers, the surge limit can mainly at pressure ratios greater than 2 be shifted to smaller mass flows. In addition, the bypass in the area of high mass flows results in a slight increase in throughput in the single digit percentage range. The achievable efficiency levels decrease as a rule when a recirculation channel is used. Inlet and discharge guide vanes Variable inlet or discharge guide vanes are also used to extend the program map. The program map can also be extended in the surge limit range by this. This means that the compressor can be operated at an operating point at which the surge limit would already be exceeded. Apart from a simple preliminary diffuser, whose vane angles twist into a specific position as the mass flow increases by means of the flow forces and are released again as the mass flow decreases, variable compressors have up to now not been series produced.
Variable compressors Still in development are variable compressors in which a variable cross section constriction is arranged upstream after the narrowest compressor cross section. This enables the surge limit to be shifted towards lower mass flows. This is consequently a further map extending or an efficiency increasing measure for operating points close to the surge limit.
Blow off valve To date compressor variants for turbocharging conventional gasoline engines are equipped with a blow off valve, whose task it is to prevent compressor surge when load is quickly removed . The blow off valve, which was originally actuated pneumatically but is now mainly actuated electrically, for this purpose creates a bypass between the compressor outlet and inlet. In this way, the compressor pumps briefly as a blower in the circuit. Today it is possible, above all by introducing electrical actuation of the wastegate, to prevent surge without the use of a blow off valve and guarantee reliable operation.
Turbochargers with variable turbine geometry, opening up new cutoff strategy possibilities, are increasingly gaining acceptance in current engine applications with modern Miller combustion processes. Turbine Turbine The turbine consists of a diffuser and a  and for passenger car applications, if the turbocharger is one without variable turbine geometry, is designed without vanes. Fixed geometry diffusers with vanes are frequently used in exhaust gas turbochargers for large engines for better fine graduation of the turbine throughput. The flow is accelerated in the diffuser and distributed as evenly as possible to the turbine wheel.
Because of their favorable mass moment of inertia, turbine wheels of semi axial design are also used. These have diagonal inflow and axial outflow. But these are not socalled diagonal turbines, which are unsuitable for these too low, specific throughputs. Axial wheels, which have axial inflow and axial outflow, are only installed in turbochargers for medium speed and slow running large engines. The achievable pressure ratios are greatly limited owing to the prevailing short channel routing here with a comparatively high, specific throughput. Axial wheels have a comparatively high speed number, a dimensionless quantity that is obtained from the quotient of the peripheral velocity and the flow velocity of the turbo machine. Without suitable matching only axial compressors can be paired with axial turbines in each case; the same applies to radial turbines.
In special cases multi flow centripetal machines are paired in order to reach a sensible level for the corresponding speed number. The interrelationship of specific mass flow and suitable design can be inferred in many available representations of the socalled Cordier diagram (Figure 8, . It relates the outside diameter of the machine impeller to the calculated diameter of an equivalent nozzle.
Exhaust gas pipe The arrangement of the exhaust gas pipe plays an important role in supercharging. Classically, a distinction is made between pulse supercharging and constant pressure supercharging. In the case of pulse supercharging, the exhaust gas pipes are routed separately to the turbine housing. Those cylinders whose exhaust pulses influence each other minimally are brought together on the exhaust gas side. This means that the scavenging processes of the cylinders that are brought together are subject to less hindrance. The turbine housing is designed in such a way that the separation of channels is maintained as far as possible up to the turbine wheel inlet. The channel cross section is the size of the exhaust cross section. The exhaust pulses reach the turbine inlet in the form of pressure waves such that pulsating pressure is applied to the turbine. This effect must be utilized at low engine speeds where the pressure surges, due to the long interval from one exhaust pulse to the other, make up substantial power contribution of the available exhaust gas enthalpy.
In the case of constant pressure supercharging, the exhaust discharges are directed in a common, comparatively large volume collector to the turbine housing. This process smooths out the individual exhaust pulses to a large extent.
With constant pressure supercharging the more uniform enthalpy over time can be processed with greater efficiency. Pulse supercharging, on the other hand, offers advantages for the engine's part load and accelerating performance.
UMM0765 1E 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.1 1 4 2 6 8 10 2 4 6 Axial Diagonal Specific speed s Specific diameter d Radial 8 10 a b c
Turbine housing: The design of the turbine housing differs significantly, depending on whether constant pressure or pulse supercharging is used. Pulse supercharging for the most part is used in commercial vehicle applications. The turbine housing is designed as double flow housing in which the two flows join only just before the wheel inlet. Constant pressure supercharging is used on high speed engines such as the diesel engines in passenger vehicles. The turbine housings are single flow in design and partially integrated into the exhaust manifold as a single component. This provides for a particularly compact component geometry.
Gasoline engines utilize both constant pressure and pulse supercharging. The exhaust gas systems are configured accordingly and the housings are single flow or twin flow in design. Partially manifold integrated turbine housings are also used in exhaust gas turbochargers for gasoline engines.
Materials The turbine wheels are made of high alloy nickel steels on account of the high demands imposed by temperature and mechanical loads. In view of the accuracy of shape required, procedures such as vacuum or centrifugal casting are used. The mechanical connection with the shaft is achieved by means of friction, laser or electron beam welding.
Non metallic and ceramic materials were analyzed as an alternative for turbine wheels. The material class titanium aluminide . AGI components reduce wall heat losses and have a low thermal inertia.
So far built up turbine housings have only been introduced in series production to a limited extent. However, these could help to meet future emission regulations in that they enable the catalytic converter to be heated up more quickly after cold starting.
Boost pressure control In view of the large rotational speed spread of passenger car engines, a boost pressure control facility is indispensable to maintain the maximum permissible boost pressure for an acceptable design torque. Standard practice presently favors turbine output control on the exhaust gas side.
Bypass control: Bypass control A simple and in gasoline and commercial vehicle engines widely used method is that of bypass control, in which generally some of the exhaust gas flow is routed through a flap valve . If the boost pressure is used, the wastegate cannot however be actuated independently of the engine operating state. The control pressures are usually adjusted by using clocked pulse valves. Because of the thermal load, the actuators are generally mounted on the compressor side and connected via a control rack to the wastegate lever.
Current developments involve almost exclusively electric actuators with position feedback, which provide for a fast and precise control response. The wastegate can therefore be actuated independently of the engine operating state. This is necessary to comply with the current statutory requirements with regard to emissions and consumption. Currently available electric actuators impress with their compact design and high actuating forces, which guarantee a better seal seat for the wastegate valve  and an accelerated build up of boost pressure.
Variable turbine geometry Variable turbine geometry Compared to bypass control, variable turbine geometry offers a more efficient method of boost pressure control over the entire operating range. Today it is state of the art in passenger car diesel engines and will in future also be introduced in commercial vehicle and gasoline engine applications. The entire mass exhaust gas flow is routed here via the turbine, providing specific benefits in exploiting the available energy.
Of all the potential designs, adjustable blades have achieved general acceptance, as they combine a wide control range with high efficiency levels . The blade angle can be easily adjusted by means of a swiveling movement. The blades, in turn, are set to the required position using adjusting cams, or directly via control levers attached to the individual blades. All blades engage in an adjusting ring which can be turned by means of a lever. The lever is actuated by pneumatic or electric actuators. Where a pneumatic unit is fitted, today exclusively a position sensor is integrated in the unit, and the signal from this sensor ensures that the VTG actual blade position is clearly identified.
, 6 Air inlet.
exhaust side boost pressure control  valve . UMM0513Y 1 2 3
The first design variations had symmetrical : blades with straight median lines. Today, profiled blades with pronounced pressure and suction sides and curved median lines are used. This helps to improve efficiency above all in the closed position, i.e., when accelerating from lower full load and in the part load range. It is particularly important for engine performance in the lower engine speed range to adhere to the smallest possible axial gaps between the adjustable blades and the adjacent components.
Owing to the high exhaust gas temperatures of a gasoline engine, the operationally reliable and durable implementation of an adjusting blade exhaust gas turbocharger involves intensive matching of thermomechanics, choice of materials, and kinematics. For this reason an adjusting blade VTG was for a long time only available in just one gasoline engine application of one sportscar manufacturer. In 2016, however, this technology also went into series production in mid size passenger cars with gasoline engines. Today they also exist in price sensitive vehicle segments in Europe and China. A Japanese manufacturer developed, aside from adjustable blade VTG, a comparatively simple variability in the area of the turbine spiral. However, to date it has not attained the performance levels of adjustable blade VTG.
There is a further operating principle, the so called sliding sleeve principle. This is a compromise solution which generates a comparatively high degree of turbine efficiency with fewer hot parts than the adjustable blade variant. A single actuator is used to achieve both variability of the turbine mass flow and the operation of an internal bypass to circumvent the turbine. Exhaust gas turbochargers with supply of additional energy Modern exhaust gas turbochargers are characterized by high efficiency levels and a low mass moment of inertia on the part of the rotor assembly such that a very good transient build up of boost pressure can be achieved, particularly in conjunction with measures on the engine, such as for instance "scavenging" . However, in view of current legislation, this measure is still only occasionally used because it can lead to a significant oxygen content in the exhaust gas. In combination with gasoline engine combustion processes and the associated exhaust gas temperatures, an oxygen excess can lead to accelerated aging of the catalytic converter substrate and consequently to a reduction of the guaranteed conversion rate to be expected. In the past various solutions have been proposed in order in states with little available exhaust gas energy to supply additional mechanical, hydraulic or electrical power to the shaft for the purpose of accelerating the rotor assembly more quickly. For example, the incorporation of a gear on the turbocharger shaft allows mechanical energy to be supplied via a gearbox and a switchable mechanical connection to the crankshaft.
A further approach provides for installing on the rotor assembly between the bearings a Pelton turbine wheel which is pressurized with high pressure oil from the engine circuit or separately with hydraulic fluid.
Electrically assisted exhaust gas Electrically assisted exhaust gas turbocharger turbocharger In a further approach it is proposed to install on the turbocharger shaft, for instance between the bearings, an electric motor which is supplied via power electronics by the vehicle electrical system . The electrically assisted turbocharger is able in certain operating phases to function as a generator and thereby return electrical energy to the vehicle electrical system. The current issues of consumption and emissions have thrown up an important additional task. The unacceptable aging of exhaust gas treatment creates the additional requirement of high expansion performance on the part of the turbine stage at full load speeds. The aim here is to lower the exhaust gas temperature downstream of the turbine to as low a level as possible so that the exhaust gas permanently guarantees the conversion of the catalytic converter. A reduction of the exhaust gas temperature to values lower than 900 degC would be desirable. This requires a particularly precise matching of the throughput and efficiency offering. A turbine bypass will not resolve the issue here, or must be able to be effectively switched off.
There are currently a number of variants : of the electrically assisted turbocharger in development. There are variants without variability and without bypass valve. The recuperation potential exceeds the excess exhaust gas enthalpy offering, by which the electrically assisted turbocharger can be braked at any time to the desired operating speed. However, this only applies to full load; a constantly sufficient electrical acceptance is the prerequisite here. This solution is a compromise which is intended to make use of a simple, cost effective and fail safe fixed geometry exhaust gas turbocharger.
Alternatively, the turbine has a wastegate so that even light off operating modes  can be supported by the turbocharger itself. Furthermore, there are electrically assisted turbochargers with variable turbine geometry. These have the distinction of being able to react much more freely to the equilibrium between available exhaust gas enthalpy, energy recuperation demand and boost pressure demand. With a suitably designed turbocharger a number of operating modes can be simultaneously run and can also be used in line with demand.
Compared to a conventional turbocharger, a magnet arrangement mounted on the shaft results in an increased moment of inertia on the part of the rotor assembly. The potential of these approaches does make it possible to shift the turbocharger's power balance independently of the engine, but this is limited by the program map limits of the compressor used. Suitable measures for shifting and extending the compressor map limits are set out in the section entitled "Compressor".
Complex supercharging systems With a parallel or serial/multistage connection of supercharger units the power limits can be significantly extended compared with supercharging with just one single stage supercharger unit. Predominantly complex valves for control, for operating point dependent cut in or for defined distribution of the exhaust gas mass flow are required. The aim here is both to improve the steady state air supply and to speed up the transient response of the build up of boost pressure. This in turn improves both the specific consumption and the controllability of the transient operating characteristics and with it the engine emission behavior.
Bi turbo supercharging In the case of bi turbo supercharging, the air supply, instead of using one large exhaust gas turbocharger, is distributed to two or more smaller exhaust gas turbochargers connected in parallel. These are generally permanently assigned to specific cylinders on the exhaust gas side, for example the bank of a V engine. Each turbocharger pressurizes the engine with air over the full rotational speed range. The advantage of this arrangement lies primarily in the rapid transient build up of boost pressure and in the comparatively compact routing of pipework. The turbochargers operating in parallel cannot be controlled independently of each other and should in the process always generate an identical boost pressure.
The sequential supercharging system contains, in addition to the turbochargers, valves and sensors which facilitate a smooth switchover from oneto two charger operation and back from twoto one charger operation. When the engine is in the lower speed range, only the basic turbocharger is active, supplying all the cylinders with air. When a certain speed is reached, the second turbocharger is run up and cut in. Both turbochargers are now operating in parallel to pressurize all the cylinders. Sharing the air supply between two turbochargers helps to deliver a very wide torque plateau and high rated output. Furthermore, the significantly lower mass moment of inertia of the smaller turbocharger rotor assemblies gives rise to a dynamic response.
An integrated arrangement of both turbochargers including the switchover valves is available on the market, but is complex and only ever specifically suitable. Controlling the switchover process by means of control engineering involves a comparatively complex application of the control parameters. Sequential supercharging is used in both gasoline and diesel engines .
1 Exhaust gas turbocharger 1, 2 Exhaust gas turbocharger 2, 3 Compressor cut in valve, 4 Turbine cut in valve,  5 Transverse pipe, 6 Bypass valve.
single stage method lies in the increase in : rated output with a simultaneous improvement in the stationary torque at low speeds and in the engine's accelerating performance thanks to the rapid build up of boost pressure. This extremely powerful system features the use of two turbochargers of significantly different sizes. A dip in torque in the switchover range when this system is appropriately tuned and controlled is largely avoidable.
The entire drawn in fresh air mass flow flows through both serial compressor stages for lower full load. As a result of precompression, the relatively small high pressure compressor works at a higher pressure level so it is able to make available the required boost pressure already for low engine speeds. Performance can be further improved by cooling the charge air after the first compression stage. Particular importance is attached to the sealing and the control quality of the turbine bypass valve in the high pressure stage. By way of this valve, depending on the operating point, either the entire exhaust gas mass flow is expanded in two stages in the high pressure turbine and then in the low pressure turbine, or some of the exhaust gas mass flow is diverted past the high pressure turbine and delivered directly to the low pressure turbine. The thermomechanical and vibrational demands placed on the valve system are very tough. This also applies to the rendering of low loss flow routing between the compressor and turbine stages.
1 Engine, 2 Intercooler, 3 Turbocharger high pressure stage, 4 Turbocharger low pressure stage, 5 Turbine bypass valve, 6 Wastegate, 7 Compressor bypass valve. A Intake air, B Exhaust gas.
1 2 3 4 5 5 5 6 6 7 7 7 6 Idle 1,500 rpm 1 2 3 4 3,250 rpm 1 2 3 4 4,200 rpm A B B B A A
The compressor bypass valve can be designed as a non return valve or as an actively actuated flap with actuator. With the latter variant the pressure loss in the compressor bypass can be reduced. But this involves increased control engineering complexity.
Both fixed geometry turbines and VTG turbines, in each case with an additional bypass valve, are used in the high pressure stage. Either a wastegate turbine or a variable geometry turbine can be used as the low pressure turbine.
Dual stage controlled supercharging was introduced as standard in passenger car diesel engines in 2004. Currently, the spread of two stage supercharging systems for use in passenger car diesel engines is dropping off because they negatively influence the engine emission behavior during the warm up phase due to their high thermal inertia.
Dual stage supercharging systems can also be used in gasoline engines and may because of the high boost pressure requirements be of interest particularly for Miller combustion processes.
Combination supercharging Combination supercharging combines a mechanically driven supercharger unit with an exhaust gas turbocharger . It can be used in comparatively small capacity gasoline engines with high rated output and high torque already at comparatively low speeds and high dynamic response.
1 Internal combustion engine, 2 Turbocharger, 3 Wastegate, 4 Compressor , 5 Control flap, 6 Throttle valve, 7 Intercooler, 8 Air filter, 9 Catalytic converter, 10 Belt drive for accessories with clutch, 11 Belt drive for compressor, 12 Crankshaft,  13 Blow off valve, 14 Fresh air, 15 Exhaust gas. 1 4 5 6 7 10 11 12 13 8 9 2 3 14 15
rated output operation. In a certain operat : ing range the system operates as a series connection of two supercharger units, i.e., the total pressure ratio is the product of the individual pressure ratios.
The mechanically driven supercharger can be positioned in the flow direction upstream or downstream of the turbocharger compressor. When the engine is in the upper speed range and there is therefore an adequate supply of exhaust gas energy, supercharging is performed solely by the turbocharger. The mechanically driven supercharger is bypassed and mechanically isolated as otherwise, even when the mechanically driven supercharger is idling, its friction losses will be removed as drive power from the crankshaft.
Electrically driven compressor in series with an exhaust gas turbocharger One possible solution for obtaining the benefits of exhaust gas turbocharging in quasi stationary operation and in the process improving the response of a turbocharger designed for high rated output is the series connection of an exhaust gas turbocharger with an electrically driven flow compressor . The advantages of this solution over the electrically assisted exhaust gas turbocharger are that the effective program map range is extended by the series connection of two flow compressors and the booster can be placed in thermally suitable locations in the engine compartment. The booster can be positioned in the flow direction before or after the turbocharger. A bypass allows the booster to be bypassed when it is not in operation.
This electrically assisted extension of the engine map is useful for both steady state and dynamic engine operation. Depending on the energy availability of the vehicle electrical system used, however, different operating strategies must be chosen for a suitable charge balance of the electrical energy accumulator. Depending on the position of the combustion limits for a fault free, reproducible combustion process, a part load application is also useful and uncritical in terms of energy. On the basis of the current CO2 balance and the emission legislation, non engine dependent boost pressure provision is real driving operation is of significant benefit when compared with other applications. The additional function as a secondary air pump and transient support of cost sensitive hybrid applications are mentioned as examples.
in series with an exhaust gas turbocharger 1 Internal combustion engine, 2 Intercooler,  3 Bypass valve for turbocharger,  4 Turbocharger turbine,  5 Turbocharger compressor,  6 Electric motor,  7 Triggering electronics for electric motor,  8 Bypass valve for eBooster,  9 eBooster compressor, 10 Exhaust gas, 11 Intake air.
For the system to operate effectively, the : booster must reach its target pressure ratio within the shortest possible time. When the acceleration of the shaft is taken into consideration, this produces a brief booster power peak. This requires a stabilization of the vehicle electrical system, especially for a vehicle system voltage of 12 to 24 V. This supercharging system is used both in some luxury class vehicles with 48 V vehicle electrical systems and in gasoline applications with 12 V vehicle electrical systems.
Current developments are concerned, aside from with engine applications, with the air supply and the recirculation of fuel cells. The assemblies are therefore designed for vehicle system voltages of up to 400 V and a maximum output of 20 kW. _________________________________ References References H. Hiereth, P. Prenninger: Aufladung der Verbrennungskraftmaschine. Springer Verlag, 2003.
 H. Sigloch: Stromungsmaschinen, Grund lagen und Anwendungen. 6th Edition, Hanser Verlag, 2018.
 M. Mayer: Abgasturbolader Sinnvolle Nutzung der Abgasenergie. 6th Edition, Verlag Moderne Industrie, 2011.
Purpose and design: In compliance with legal requirements, the exhaust gas system reduces the pollutants in the exhaust gas that are generated by an internal combustion engine. The exhaust gas system also helps to muffle exhaust gas noise and to discharge the exhaust gas at a convenient point on the vehicle. Engine power should be reduced as little as possible during the process. Components An exhaust gas system consists of the exhaust manifold, the components for exhaust gas treatment and for sound absorption, and the connections between these components.
The design and the layout of these components are very different for passenger cars and commercial vehicles. In the case of passenger car exhaust gas systems the components are usually individually connected by pipes and routed under the vehicle chassis . Depending on engine displacement and the type of muffler used, a passenger car exhaust gas system weighs between 8 and 40 kg. The components are primarily made of highalloy steels, as they are exposed to corrosion attacks from the inside by hot gas and condensate, and from the outside by moisture and splash and salt water.
1 Exhaust manifold, 2 Near engine catalytic converter, 3 Front pipe, 4 Front muffler,  5 Intermediate pipe, 6 Center muffler, 7 Rear muffler, 8 Exhaust gas flap, 9 Tailpipe. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 1 5 UMA0054 1Y
ers). Some catalytic converter coatings, : such as those for NOx storage converters for example, are highly sensitive to temperature. These catalytic converters are therefore sooner installed in the cooler underbody area.
Diesel particulate filters are also installed in the front area of the exhaust gas system to ensure that the soot particles they have retained are burnt off more effectively at the higher exhaust gas temperatures.
the hydrocarbons  increasingly produced in this operating state.
Diesel engines require an oxidationtype catalytic converter to oxidize the hydrocarbons .
In order to ensure that the emissions are converted as much as possible in the catalytic converter or are well filtered in the particulate filter, it is essential to optimize the flow against these components in the exhaust gas system. This is generally achieved by the shaping of the inflow funnel. Additional components such as swirl or mixing elements are required to optimize uniform distribution further. Especially SCR systems in which a reducing agent .
Sound absorption The primary cause of exhaust gas noise is the gas pulsations of the internal combustion engine, i.e. the gas vibrations which are generated by the combustion process and by the exhaust gas being forced out through the exhaust valves during each engine power cycle. This pulsation noise is in fact damped slightly by the catalytic converters and particulate filter. But this is not sufficient to keep the noise below the pass by limit value prescribed by law . For this reason, mufflers are installed in the middle or rear section of the exhaust gas system.
Depending on the number of cylinders and engine output, generally one, two or three mufflers are used in an exhaust gas system. In V engines, the left and right cylinder banks are often run separately, each being fitted with its own catalytic converters and mufflers.
of reducing agent in SCR system 1 Reservoir for reducing agent,  2 Connection, injector for reducing agent,  3 Injector for reducing agent,  4 Gas flow, 5 Exhaust pipe, 6 Mixer,  7 Inflow funnel, 8 SCR catalytic converter..
Exhaust manifold: An important component in the exhaustgas system is the exhaust manifold . For operational reasons, several differently coated monoliths are often used in one catalytic converter. Particular attention must be paid to the shape of the inflow funnel to ensure that the exhaust gas flows uniformly through the monolith. The external shape of the monolith depends on the installation space available in the vehicle, and may be triangular, oval or round.
Ceramic monolith: The ceramic monolith is made of cordierite. Depending on the cell density, the wall thickness between the channels ranges from 0.05 mm .
Ceramic monoliths have an extremely high stability to temperature and thermal shock. However, they cannot be installed directly in the metal housing and require a special mounting. This mounting is necessary in order to compensate for the difference between the thermal expansion coefficients of steel and ceramics, and to protect the sensitive monolith against shocks. Extreme care and attention is required in the mounting and production process, particularly for thin walled monoliths . The monolith is mounted on a mat located between the metal housing and the ceramic monolith. The mounting mat is made up of ceramic fibers. It is extremely flexible to ensure that the pressure load exerted on the monoliths is at a minimum. It also serves as a heat insulator.
Particulate filter As with catalytic converter monoliths, there are metallic and ceramic particulate filter systems. The method of installing and mounting this filter in the metal housing is the same as the process used for the catalytic converter.
is forced to flow through the porous walls of the honeycomb structure. The solid particles are deposited in the pores. Depending on the porosity of the ceramic body, the filtration efficiency of these filters can attain up to 97 %.
Regeneration The soot deposits in the particulate filter induce a steady rise in flow resistance. For this reason, the particulate filter must be regenerated at certain intervals in two different processes. Details on these processes are described elsewhere . Passive process Passive process In the passive process, the soot is burnt off by a catalytic reaction. For this purpose, an additive in the diesel fuel reduces the flammability of the soot particles to normal exhaust gas temperatures.
Mufflers: Mufflers are intended to smooth out exhaust gas pulsations and make them as inaudible as possible. There are essentially two physical principles involved: reflection and absorption. Mufflers also differ according to these principles. However, they mostly comprise a combination of reflection and absorption.
the perforation in the absorption material, where they are then muffled. Figure 6c shows a combination of reflection muffler and absorption muffler.
1 Inlet pipe,  2 Perforated pipe, 3 Chamber,  4 Venturi nozzle, 5 Absorption material,  6 Outlet pipe.
1 2 3 4 5 UMA0019 4Y UMA0057 1Y a 1 2 3 4 5 5 b c 1 2 2 2 2 5 6 6 6 1
Absorption mufflers: Absorption mufflers are designed with one chamber, through which a perforated pipe passes . The sound enters the absorption material through the perforated pipe and is converted into heat by friction.
The absorption material usually consists of long fiber mineral wool or glass fibers with a bulk density of 100 to 150 g/l. The level of muffling depends on the bulk density, the sound absorption grade of the material, and on the length and coating thickness of the chamber. Damping takes place across a very broad frequency band, but only begins at higher frequencies.
The shape of the perforations, and the fact that the pipe passes through the wool, ensures that the material is not blown out by exhaust gas pulses. Sometimes the mineral wool is protected by a layer of stainless steel wool around the perforated pipe.
Because the exhaust gas in absorption mufflers essentially passes through a straight pipe, the pressure loss here is very low compared with the pressure loss at the differences in the cross sections in reflection mufflers.
Muffler design Depending on the space available under the vehicle, mufflers are produced either as spiral wound casing or from half shells. To produce the jacket for a spiral wound muffler, one or several metal sheet blanks are shaped over a round mandril and joined together either by the longitudinal folds or by laser welding. The completely assembled and welded core is then installed in the jacket casing. It consists of internal tubes, baffles, and intermediate layers. The outer layers are then connected to the jacket in a folding or laserwelding process.
It is often not possible to effectively accommodate a spiral wound muffler in view of the complicated space conditions in the floor assembly. In such cases, a shell type muffler made of deep drawn half shells is used as it can assume virtually any required shape.
Connecting elements: Pipes are used to connect the catalytic converters and mufflers together. Arrangements where the catalytic converter and muffler are integrated in a single housing may also be used on very small engines and vehicles .
The pipes, the catalytic converter and muffler are connected to form an integrated system by means of plug in connections and flanges. Many originalequipment systems are fully welded for faster mounting.
The entire exhaust gas system is connected to the vehicle underbody via elastic mounting elements . The fixing points must be carefully selected, otherwise vibration may be transmitted to the bodywork and generate noise in the passenger compartment. The wrong fixing points may also create strength and therefore durability problems. In some cases, these problems are counteracted by the use of vibration absorbers. These components oscillate at the critical frequency in precisely the opposite direction of the exhaust gas system, thereby absorbing system vibration.
The exhaust gas system noise at the exhaust emission point are used to isolate the exhaust gas system from the engine block and to relieve the stress load on the exhaust gas system. A decoupling element comprises the liner, i.e. an inner pipe with pipe segments that move in each other. The corrugated pipe, also known as the boot, is mounted on top. The liner serves to protect the boot and limit linear expansion. The corrugated pipe exercises the decoupling/isolating effect by way of its soft structure. The corrugated pipe is protected against external influences by a wire fabric jacket.
Finally, the mounting arrangement of an exhaust gas system is tuned so that it is rigid enough to withstand vibrations reliably on the one hand, and it exhibits sufficient flexibility and damping properties to reduce the transfer of forces to the bodywork effectively on the other.
Acoustic tuning devices : A number of different components can be used to eliminate disturbing frequencies in the noise emitted from the tailpipe. These components can be used specifically to damp individual frequency ranges very effectively.
___ 2p    ____ A ____ L * V   The value c is the speed of sound.
Exhaust gas flaps Exhaust gas flaps are most commonly found in rear mufflers. Depending on the engine speed or exhaust gas throughput, they close off a bypass pipe in the muffler or a second tailpipe . As a result, exhaust gas noise can be substantially damped at lower engine speeds without the need to trade off power losses at high engine speeds.
Commercial vehicle : exhaust gas systems In commercial vehicle exhaust gas systems most of the previously described components are integrated in a housing which is mounted to the vehicle frame. The number of catalytic converters and particulate filters depends on which emissions control legislation the exhaust gas system is designed for.
Exhaust gas systems for Euro IV  and Euro V Generally speaking, a particulate filter is not required for Euro IV and Euro V. Only oxidation and SCR catalytic converters are used . Alternatively, the diesel engine can also be tuned in such a way that the untreated NOx emissions comply with the limit values for Euro IV and Euro V. But then a particulate filter is required in the exhaust gas system.
system with SCR catalytic converters. In contrast to passenger car exhaust gas systems, several catalytic converters are frequently arranged in parallel in order to accommodate the required catalytic surface in the space available. Bypass pipes and holes in the bases serve to route the gases and muffle the sound. Depending on the engine size, these systems attain a volume of 150 to 200 l and a weight of 150 kg.
1 Urea injector,  2 Decoupling element,  3 HC injector,  4 Inlet pipe,  5 Pre oxidation catalytic converter   ,  8 SCR catalytic converter,  9 Outlet pipe.
exhaust gas system for Euro IV 1 SCR catalytic converters, 2 Inlet pipe, 3 Outlet pipe, 4 Tailpipe, 5 Exhaust gas inlet. 1 3 4 5 2 1 UMA0088Y 1 2 3 8 7 6 5 4 9
Two concepts are currently used. Either all the components are accommodated in a single housing or the SCR catalytic converters and the particulate filters are divided between two housings. The following components are additionally required to ensure correct functioning of exhaustgas treatment: The SCR function requires a urea metering system .
A variety of sensors must also be accommodated in the housings. In addition to pressure sensors for monitoring the filter load, temperature sensors and NOx sensors for monitoring NOx conversion are required. The position of the sensors in the exhaust gas system must, depending on the system design, be optimized to guarantee an adequate signal quality in all operating states.
Description of the engine : management system The engine management system ensures that the driver command is implemented. The driver can request acceleration, deceleration or driving at a constant speed the engine management system ensures that the spark ignition engine's drive output required to achieve this is set. The system controls all engine functions in such a way that the engine delivers the required level of torque, but fuel consumption and exhaust emissions are kept low.
The primary function of engine management is to coordinate the various subsystems in order to adjust the torque requested by the engine and at the same time meet the exacting standards placed on exhaustgas emissions, fuel consumption, power output, comfort, and safety. The enginemanagement system also performs diagnoses on the subsystems.
1 Auxiliary systems   , 2 Engine, 3 Clutch, 4 Transmission, 5 Drive wheels.
UMM0545 3E Air mass Engine Charge cycle and friction Ancillaries Clutch losses and clutch ratio Transmission losses and transmission ratio Combustion torque Engine torque Clutch torque Drive torque Clutch Transmission 1 1 2 3 4 5 5
System overview: Electrical system overview Motronic is the name given to Bosch systems for the openand closed loop control of spark ignition interfaces.
The nerve center of the engine control unit is a microcontroller with a program memory .
The low level signal data from the microcontroller outputs are adapted by the driver stages to the levels required by the various actuators.
Another important function of Motronic is the monitoring of the operational ability of the entire system, using On Board Diagnostics is dedicated to diagnosticsrelated tasks.
ADC Function computer 2 1 RAM Driving speed Diagnostics CAN Monitoring module UMK1678 4E
Functional system overview: An engine management system has many other secondary functions in addition to its primary functions of cylinder charge control, fuel supply, mixture formation, and ignition. The entire system is broken down into subsystems so that they can be described more clearly and in greater detail. The full description is shown in the system structure .
Torque Demand subsystem The driver issues a concrete driver command through the accelerator pedal position. The accelerator pedal position is converted into a setpoint value for the drive torque.
As well as a direct torque input, the driver can also input an indirect driver command via the cruise control system. A setpoint drive torque is calculated, depending on the current driving condition. When the accelerator pedal is not pressed, that amount of engine torque which is needed to maintain idle speed is calculated.
Drivability filters, the surge damping function, the electrical system and other electrical consumers such as the air conditioning system issue further torque demands.
Torque Structure are coordinated in the Torque Structure subsystem. The result is the generation of a torque demand made of the internal combustion engine.
The charge is input as a relative air mass. The relative air mass  is the ratio between the real air mass in the cylinder and the maximum possible air mass in the cylinder at the current engine speed.
Torque reductions can be represented with injection blank outs . In these operating modes, it is also possible to set the engine torque by inputting a l setpoint value.
Physical models calculate the actual : engine torque at the clutch from various sensor signals. The actual torque is used to monitor the Motronic system and is required by other systems such as transmission control.
Air System subsystem The input of the relative setpoint air mass from the Torque Structure subsystem is converted into concrete quantities for the actuators which are used for cylindercharge control.
The throttle valve is the main actuator for charge. Models are used to calculate the throttle valve opening angle from the setpoint air mass and from this opening angle, a pulse width modulated activation of the actuator.
There are systems in which the main setting path is represented by the activation of intake and exhaust valves. The throttle valve usually remains constantly open in such systems. Only in special situations is the throttle valve used in these systems as the setting path for charge.
In addition, the current actual charge of the internal combustion engine is determined. Sensor signals such as pressure and temperature in the intake manifold are used as basic variables for this purpose.
Fuel System subsystem The function of the fuel system is to supply the fuel rail with fuel from the fuel tank in the requested quantity and at the prespecified pressure.
By using the current actual charge, the fuel pressure in the rail and the pressure in the intake manifold, the opening duration of the fuel injectors is calculated from the l setpoint value.
Ignition System , and an ignition spark is generated at the spark plug at the desired moment of ignition.
The ignition angle is set in such a way that the engine runs with optimal consumption. The subsystem only deviates from this in a few special situations .
The knock control system permanently monitors combustion in all the cylinders. It ensures that the engine runs with optimal consumption close to the knock limit. At the same time, damage caused by combustion knock is safely avoided. Failures in the knock detection path are subject to continuous monitoring so that ignition can be effected in the event of a fault at sufficient distance from the knock limit. Exhaust System subsystem The openand closed loop control interventions for optimum operation of the three way catalytic converter are calculated in this subsystem. The combustion mixture must be regulated within narrow limits around the stoichiometric mixture ratio.
The operational capability of the catalytic converter is also monitored. The signals from exhaust gas sensors serve as the basis for this monitoring.
Component protection functions ensure that the exhaust system is not subject to thermal overloads. The actual temperatures in the exhaust system required for this purpose are usually modeled.
In lean burn operating modes with stratified fresh charge , the combustion mixture is also controlled to ensure optimum operation of the NOx storage catalytic converter.
Coordination Engine are coordinated and switched over. In order to determine the required operating mode, the demands of various functionalities must be coordinated on the basis of defined priorities.
Operating Data , ensures digital conditioning and plausibilization, and makes the result available to the other subsystems.
Accessory Control subsystem Additional functionalities such as A/Ccompressor control, fan control or enginetemperature regulation are frequently integrated into the engine management system. They are coordinated in the Accessory Control subsystem.
Communication .
Diagnostic System . The faults can be called up at a later stage on workshop testers.
Some diagnostic functions are only operational under certain boundary conditions . There are also diagnostic function which must occur in a prespecified sequence. Coordination of this sequence control is performed by the Diagnostic System.
Monitoring subsystem "Drive by wire" systems are relevant to monitoring. The core function is torque comparison. This compares the permissible torque calculated on the basis of driver command with the actual torque calculated from the engine data.
System Control are required for the resource optimization of the computing time.
System Document subsystem In addition to the extensive openand closed loop control functions of the Motronic system, numerous documents are required in order to describe a concrete project in detail. These documents include system descriptions of the ECU hardware and software, the wiring harness, the engine data, components, and connectionpin assignments.
The basis for the first Motronic, which was introduced from 1979 onwards in production vehicles, was the L Jetronic fuel injection system with air flow sensing and electronic ignition with rotating distributor system for a manifold injection engine with individual cylinder injection and a conventional, mechanical throttle valve. This M Motronic was further developed like the injection and ignition systems further used in parallel for this purpose. For load sensing the air flow sensor was replaced by the air mass meter, which enables the engine load to be sensed more accurately. Electronic ignition with rotating ignition distributor system was replaced by fully electronic ignition with static distributor system, in which a separate ignition coil generates the high voltage for each cylinder.
1 Carbon canister, 2 Hot film air mass meter with integrated temperature sensor, 3 Throttle device , 18 l sensor downstr.
.
Figure 5: DI Motronic system diagram for gasoline direct injection , 23 Exhaust gas turbocharger, 24 Engine ECU, 25 Speed sensor, 26 Knock sensor, 27 l sensor upstr. of  close coupled cat. conv.
, 36 l sensor downstr. of  close coupled cat. conv.
UMK2129Y 1 2 8 3 4 5 9 10 11 12  21 23 22 13 14 24 26 28 31 30 25 27 32 33 34 18 19 37 35 36 20 6 7 CAN 29 15    17 16
Figure 6: DI Motronic system diagram for gasoline direct injection , 26 Exhaust gas turbocharger, 27 Engine ECU, 28 CAN interface, 29 Fault lamp, 30 Diagnosis interface, 31 Interface to immobilizer ECU, 32 Accelerator pedal module  with pedal travel sensor, 33 Fuel tank, 34 In tank unit with electric fuel pump, fuel filter and fuel pressure regulator, 35 Speed sensor, 36 l sensor upstr. of closecoupled cat. conv.
, 38 l sensor downstr. of  close coupled cat. conv.
 or NOx sensor.
1 2 4 3 7 8 6 9 10 5 11 26 18 27 19 20 22 28 31 30 35 36 37 38 40 41 39 32 33 34 23 24 25 12 13 14 16 15 17 CAN 29 21 UMK2132Y
Motronic versions : for motorcycles The huge diversity of motorcycles available on the market internationally is reflected in the wide range of requirements imposed on engine management. Engine management has not by a long shot arrived on the scene in all segments and markets of the motorcycle sector. The Asian market in particular India and China is dominated by single cylinder vehicles with low engine displacement under 150 cm3 which are still entirely reliant on carburetor technology. Today, the persistent widespread use of air cooled engines  motorcycles under 150 cm3 already have electronic engine management systems. Motronic for multiple cylinder engines Adapted engine management systems from the passenger car sector are used for large capacity multiple cylinder engines in motorcycles.
Two particular features of these single cylinder engines for motorcycles are the high rotational non uniformities of the crankshaft . This behavior characteristic of single cylinder engines can be used to implement the assignment of the engine position to the compression cycle or to the exhaust cycle without a camshaft speed sensor.
System simplifications in the small engine segment play a key role in equipping the huge number of motorcycles in Asia with efficient engine management.
The increasing requirements with regard to exhaust gas quality and requirements from on board diagnosis will result in system engineering changes in the future. Thus, a second, heated l sensor downstream of the catalytic converter is used for example to diagnose catalytic converter aging. The catalytic converter itself must be adapted in terms of its dimensions to the more stringent limits. The catalytic converter heating strategy performed by the engine management makes an important contribution to heating the catalytic converter quickly.
non uniformity for cars and motorcycles. 1 Three cylinder engine for cars, 2 Single cylinder engine for motorcycles. 1 2 Crank position 0deg 180deg 360deg 180deg 360deg Engine speed 2700 2800 2900 3000 3100 3200 rpm SMM0721 1E
Figure 8: MSE M Motronic with mechanical throttle valve for motorcycles: . 1 Carbon canister, 2 Tank vent valve,  3 In tank unit with electric fuel pump, fuel filter and fuel pressure regulator, 4 Fuel injector, 5 Ignition coil, 6 Spark plug, 7 rpm sensor, 8 Engine temperature sensor, 9 l sensor upstream of catalyst, 10 Intake manifold pressure and temperature sensor, 11 Engine control unit, 12 CAN interface, 13 Fault lamp, 14 Diagnosis interface, 15 Mechanical throttle device, 16 Throttle grip with Bowden cable, 17 Throttle valve sensor, 18 Controlled air bypass. UMK2251Y CAN 16 11 12 13 14 17 18 9 7 8 1 2 15 10 4 6 5 3
Figure 9: MSE E Motronic with electronic throttle valve , 16 Throttle grip with grip travel sensor, 17 Knock sensor. UMK2252 1Y CAN 11 12 13 14 16 17 9 7 8 1 2 15 10 4 6 3 5
Component parts: The gas mixture located in the cylinder after the intake valves have closed is termed the cylinder charge. It consists of the supplied fresh A/F mixture and the residual exhaust gas. The major components that influence the cylinder charge are shown in Figure 1. The throttle valve is the most important component on modern systems.
Fresh A/F mixture The component parts of the fresh A/F mixture drawn in are fresh air and on systems with external mixture formation the fuel suspended in it . Most of the fresh air flows through the throttle valve; additional fresh A/F mixture can be drawn in through the evaporative emissions control system. The air mass present in the cylinder after the intake valves have closed is the decisive factor in the work performed above the piston during combustion, and ultimately in the torque delivered by the engine. Therefore, measures for increasing maximum torque and maximum engine power almost always require an increase in the maximum possible cylinder charge. The theoretical maximum charge is predetermined by the piston displacement and, in the case of turbocharged engines, by the achievable charge air pressure, as well.
The amount of residual exhaust gas is determined by the charge cycle. It does not contribute directly to the combustion process, but does influence ignition and the combustion process as a whole. At wide open throttle, the amount of residual exhaust gas generally needs to be as small as possible in order to maximize the fresh air mass and also the power output of the engine.
At part load, however, the amount of residual exhaust gas is desirable in order to reduce fuel consumption. This is achieved by a more favorable cycle, resulting from a change in mixture composition, and also by a reduction in pump losses during the charge cycle, as a higher intake manifold pressure is required for the same air charge. A specifically introduced amount of residual exhaust gas can likewise reduce the emission of nitrogen oxides .
engine 1 Air and fuel vapor,  2 Canister purge valve .
Control of cylinder charge: On spark ignition .
Throttle valve The critical adjustment mechanism for controlling air mass flow supplied to the cylinders is the throttle valve. When the throttle valve is not fully open, the air flow drawn in by the engine is throttled, thus reducing maximum engine torque. This throttling effect is dependent on the position, and thus the opening cross section of the throttle valve, as well as on engine speed . Maximum torque is developed with the throttle valve wide open. By the end of the 1990s the mechanical throttle valve was state of the art. The driver directly controls the opening of the throttle valve via a Bowden cable by pressing the accelerator pedal.
On systems with electronic throttle control , the required air charge is calculated from the desired engine torque, which is obtained from the acceleratorpedal position, and the throttle valve is activated accordingly.
Electronic throttle control consists of the accelerator pedal module, the engine control unit, and the throttle device. The throttle device mainly consists of the throttle valve, the electric throttle valve drive element, and the throttle valve position sensor. The drive element is a DC motor, which acts on the throttle valve shaft via a gear unit. The throttle valve position sensor, designed as a redundant unit, detects the position of the throttle valve.
The driver command is detected by the redundant sensor system in the accelerator pedal module, and the signal is sent to the engine control unit. This calculates the required cylinder charge, based on the current engine operating point, and regulates the opening angle of the throttle A/F mixture Speed min.
Charge cycle The charge cycle of fresh A/F mixture and residual exhaust gas is controlled by the opening and closing of the intake and exhaust valves. The opening and closing times of the valves and the valve lift curve are critical factors.
Valve timing Valve timing Valve overlap, i.e. the overlap of the opened times of the intake and exhaust valves, has a decisive influence on the mass of residual outlet gas remaining in the cylinder. The quantities of fresh A/F mixture and residual exhaust gas in the cylinder can be controlled by changing the valve lift time curves.
In the overlap phase exhaust gas flows through the intake valve into the intake system due to the pressure differential between the exhaust system and the intake manifold. In the induction stroke it then returns to the combustion chamber , the more mass of exhaust gas remains in the cylinder. This results in shortened combustion temperatures and thus a reduction in NOx emissions.
However, since recirculated exhaust gas displaces fresh A/F mixture, opening the intake valve early also leads to a reduction in the maximum torque. In addition, excessively high exhaust gas recirculation, particularly at idle, can lead to combustion misses which, in turn, cause an increase in HC emissions. With variable valve timing, varying the timing dependent on the operating point can optimize emissions.
By varying the valve timing accordingly , it is possible to control the air mass flow, and thus engine performance, without having to use the throttle valve. The amount of residual exhaust gas can also be adjusted by means of valve timing.
On today's systems, the valves are actuated mechanically via the camshaft. Additional measures can be used to vary this activation to a certain degree . However, these mechanical systems cannot dispense with the throttle valve completely.
Scavenging Scavenging In modern turbocharged engines valvegear variabilities are additionally used to increase significantly the torque in the low rpm range. This timing strategy is called scavenging. For this purpose the phase position of the intake valves and if necessary the exhaust valves are adjusted in the full load range in such a way as to produce a valve overlap. During the valve overlap a partial flow of air passes directly again through the exhaust valve to the exhaust side, improving the scavenging of residual gas and with it enhancing anti knock performance. At the same time the additional scavenging air improves process control at the turbocharger so that higher charge air pressures can be achieved.
Exhaust gas recirculation . When the valve is open and with a pressure differential between the exhaust gas system and the intake manifold, the engine draws in a combination of fresh A/F mixture and exhaust gas. The engine ECU calculates the level of exhaust gas recirculation for a specific operating state, and activates the exhaust gas recirculation valve accordingly.
Fuel reduction Fuel reduction Exhaust gas recirculation increases intake manifold pressure. The higher intake manifold pressure leads to a reduction in the charge cycle work and this lowers fuel consumption.
NO: NOx reduction reduction Exhaust gas recirculation is used on engines with gasoline direct injection which operate in lean burn mode to reduce NOx emissions. Exhaust gas recirculation is the main way to minimize untreated NOx emissions, and thus prolong the duration of lean burn operation, which is limited by the NOx storage catalytic converter.
Exhaust gas can be conducted back to the combustion chamber to reduce peak combustion temperatures. The reduction in temperature is based on the fact that the returned exhaust gas does not participate in the combustion and thus delivers no combustion energy. It is also an additional thermal mass, which means that the combustion energy distributes itself to a higher overall mass.
Higher combustion temperatures induce an over proportional increase in NOx formation, and as exhaust gas recirculation reduces combustion temperatures, it represents a particularly effective means of controlling NOx emissions.
Supercharging The torque obtainable is proportional to the charge of fresh A/F mixture. This enables an increase in the maximum torque in that the air in the cylinder is compressed by means of dynamic charging, mechanical charging or exhaust turbocharging .
Recording of air charge The cylinder charge crucially influences the power output, fuel consumption, and emissions. The composition of the air/ fuel mixture plays a decisive role here . To be able to adjust this correctly, it is necessary among others things to record the cylinder charge in the engine management system with great precision. The throttle valve, as the central adjustment mechanism, determines the pressure in the intake manifold and uses this to influence the air mass flow. Therefore the intake manifold pressure is one of the central input variables which the engine management draws on to calculate the cylinder charge. The fresh air mass however still depends on many additional factors, such as the ambient pressure, the throttle valve leakage, the position of the gas exchange valves, the operating status of the exhaust gas turbocharger, the position of the swirl control valves, and the exhaust gas recirculation. To take these influences into account, the engine management system has in part further sensor technology, such as a hot film air mass meter to determine the cylinder charge.
Particularities for motorcycles Particularities for motorcycles Motorcycles generally have less variability in the air system. Turbocharging, exhaust gas recirculation and variable valve timing have barely featured up to now. Variable intake manifold geometries have hitherto been the preserve of vehicles of higher performance classes. Particularly in small single cylinder engines, therefore, the air charge is recorded purely by way of the throttle valve position and intake manifold pressure.
Compared with typical passenger car : applications, there are systematic differences in the intake manifold pressure behavior. These are primarily attributable to different, geometric conditions. While in passenger car applications a common throttle valve is for the most part used for a number of cylinders, motorcycles frequently rely on individual throttle valves . While for a car a virtually constant vacuum is obtained in the intake manifold with a comparable load point and comparable engine speed, for a motorcycle the vacuum is achieved only briefly during the intake phase. As soon as the intake valves are closed, fresh air flows through the throttle valve and the intakemanifold pressure increases to ambient pressure. This behavior must be taken into account in the recording of charge by the engine management since the mean intake manifold vacuum can only be used to a limited extent to determine the freshair mass.
Cylinder shutoff: On engines with cylinder shutoff individual cylinders can be shut off at part load. The cylinders that continue to fire then generate the entire demanded torque. The air charge required for this is roughly doubled when every second cylinder is shut off referred to the corresponding full engine operating point. The lower gas exchange losses as a result of the de throttling of the fired cylinders give rise to reduced fuel consumption. The gas exchange losses can be further reduced by shutting off the gas exchange valves of the non fired cylinders. This shutoff necessitates accordingly designed valve gear .
The most important motivation behind an engine design with cylinder shutoff is the reduction of fuel consumption. Since diesel engines are as a rule operated under de throttled conditions to a large extent, the advantage is confined to the shutoff of the charge cycle. The reduced consumption that can be achieved by cylinder shutoff is dependent, aside from the operating point profile, on the individual engine and drivetrain design. In gasoline engines with charge cycle shutoff, it is realistic to achieve improvements in the higher single digit percentage range in the conventional driving cycles and in the double digit percentage range at individual operating points at low load.
Configuration of cylinder shutoff A cylinder shutoff can be implemented both in an engine with multiple cylinders and in an engine with only two cylinders. Different cylinder shutoff configurations are possible here. The possible configurations are derived from the engine's design features. The most important criteria are the firing order and the respective layout of the intake and exhaust tracts. In most series applications every second cylinder in firing order and consequently half the cylinders is shut off. In half engine operation shuttable off and permanently fired cylinders are operated in the same bank. Here it is necessary to shut off the charge cycle, since l control and the conversion capability of the catalytic converter would not be guaranteed with the oxygen that otherwise enters the exhaust tract.
be dispensed with. This reduces the design complexity and the costs, but does not exploit the full CO2 savings potential of cylinder shutoff.
Adaptation of vehicle components With regard to NVH aspects , it may, aside from the valve gear, also be necessary to adapt the design of the dual mass flywheel, the engine bearings, and the exhaust gas system. An intake manifold pressure sensor may also be needed to diagnose the valve actuators.
Engine management Engine management is particularly important when it comes to operating an engine with cylinder shutoff. Partial engine operation necessitates the adaptation of numerous software functions . Furthermore, additional functions for requirement and changeover coordination and diagnosis of the valve actuators for zero stroke are required.
Control of the changeover between full: and partial engine operation is particularly complex because all the changeovers must take place imperceptibly to the driver and the response must not be delayed compared with full engine operation. As well as charge adaption, exactly timed fading out and in of fuel injection for the shuttable off cylinders and interventions via the moment of ignition are required for this purpose. Therefore, as well as engine coordination, torque structure, air, fuel, ignition and exhaust systems, and ETC monitoring are also adapted.
Cylinder shutoff requirement Operating mode control by engine management constantly monitors numerous conditions for cylinder shutoff. Among the most important input variables is the setpoint torque to be developed by the engine, since the maximum settable torque is limited with cylinder shutoff. Another important input variable is the engine speed, since reliable switching of the gas exchange valves is not possible above a limit speed. Further input variables are the engine temperature and the driving speed. Conditions are assigned to each input variable. On this basis either partial or full engine operation is requested. Changeover between partialand full engine operation The changeover to partial engine operation begins with the increase of the air charge so that the still fired cylinder can generate the entire demanded engine torque. In an engine with one intake manifold the increase is effected jointly for all the cylinders. In an engine with separate intake manifolds the air change can be changed for the still fired cylinder bank regardless of the bank to be shut off. To deliver the required setpoint torque, the moment of ignition must be retarded accordingly. As soon as a sufficient torque reserve has been created by way of the air charge buildup, the gas exchange valves can be deactivated for the cylinders to be shut off and fuel injection faded out. The moment of ignition is then advanced again.
The changeover to full engine operation begins with the activation of charge cycle and fuel injection and ignition angle adjustment. The moment of ignition is advanced in parallel with the charge adaptation.
SMK2360 1E Torque requirement Engine speed Central on board diagnostics system ETC monitoring Start/stop Thermal system Transmission Driving state Start monitoring End of Line Diagnostic tester Engine coordination Ignition system Fuel system Exhaust system Air system Release coordination Switching control Actuator hardware Filling control Filling detection
Fuel supply and delivery : with intake manifold injection Different system configurations operating with intake manifold injection typically at fuel pressures of approx. 300 to 400 kPa  are used to supply fuel.
System with fuel return The electric fuel pump delivers the fuel and generates the injection pressure . The rail supplies the fuel to the fuel injectors.
The mechanical fuel pressure regulator mounted on the rail is a differential pressure regulator with pneumatic connection to the intake manifold. It keeps the difference between fuel pressure in the rail and the intake manifold pressure constant. The amount of fuel metered by the fuel injectors depends on this pressure differential because fuel is injected against the pressure in the intake manifold. Because the pressure regulator regulates to a constant pressure differential irrespective of the absolute intake manifold pressure i.e., irrespective of the engine load the amount of fuel injected is only dependent on the duration of the fuel injector activation time .
The fuel not needed by the engine flows through the rail via the return line connected to the fuel pressure regulator back to the fuel tank. This excess fuel heated in the engine compartment causes the fuel temperature in the fuel tank to rise. Fuel vapor is generated as a function of fuel temperature. Ensuring adherence to environmental protection regulations, the vapors are routed through a tank ventilation system for intermediate storage in a carbon canister until they can be returned through the intake manifold for combustion in the engine .
Returnless system In a returnless fuel supply system the fuel pressure regulator is located in the fuel supply module installed in the fuel tank, which means that the return line from the engine to the fuel tank is no longer required . Since the fuel pressure regulator on account of its installation location has no reference to the intake manifold pressure, the relative injection pressure compared with the intake manifold pressure is not dependent on the engine load. This is taken into account in the calculation of the injection time in the engine control unit.
1 Fuel tank, 2 Electric fuel pump, 3 Fuel filter, 4 Pressure line, 5 Fuel pressure regulator, 6 Fuel injectors, 7 Rail , 8 Return line, 9, 10 Flow direction of fuel.
tric fuel pump returns directly to the fuel : tank without taking the circuitous route through the engine compartment. In this way, fuel heating in the fuel tank and thus also evaporative emissions are significantly lower than in systems with fuel return. Because of these advantages, it is mainly only returnless systems which are now used.
Demand regulated returnless system In a demand regulated system, the fuel supply pump delivers only that amount of fuel that is currently used by the engine and that is required to set up the desired pressure. Pressure control is effected by means of a closed control loop in the engine control unit, whereby the current fuel pressure is recorded by a pressure sensor .
The system is equipped with a pressure relief valve to prevent the buildup of excessive pressure even during overrun fuel cutoff or after the engine has been switched off.
As a result of demand control, no excess fuel is compressed and thus the capacity of the electric fuel pump is minimized. This results in reduced fuel consumption compared with system with non controlled electric fuel pumps. The intank fuel temperature can also be further reduced.
Further advantages of a demand regulated system are derived from the variably adjustable fuel pressure. On the one hand, the pressure can be increased during hot starting to prevent the formation of vapor bubbles. On the other hand, it is possible above all in turbocharging applications to meter better the very large injected quantities required at high loads and the very small quantities at idle by effecting a pressure increase at full load and a pressure decrease at very low loads. This resolves the problem of metering small quantities in the fuel injector configuration.
Furthermore, the measured fuel pressure provides for improved diagnostic options for the fuel system compared with previous systems. More precise fuel metering is achieved by taking into account the current fuel pressure when calculating the injection time.
returnless system) 1 Electric fuel pump with fuel filter  , 6 Fuel injectors, 7 Fuel tank, 8 Suction jet pump, 9, 10 Flow direction of fuel.
Fuel supply and delivery with : gasoline direct injection Compared with injecting fuel into the intake manifold, there is only a limited time window available for injecting fuel directly into the combustion chamber. Mixture formation is therefore more important and fuel must be injected in the case of direct injection at a pressure approximately 50 times greater than is the case with intake manifold injection.
Low pressure system With gasoline direct injection the low pressure system serves to supply the high pressure system, involving the use of the same fuel systems and components as intake manifold injection. Because of the high temperatures at the high pressure pump in hot start and hot running conditions, a higher predelivery pressure  relative to the ambient pressure.
Demand controlled systems are increasingly being used as a further variant. In contrast to demand regulated systems, in which the pressure is adjusted via a closed control loop by the pressure sensor, the pressure sensor is omitted here and the system costs are thus reduced. The electric fuel pump is activated 100 % by pilot control as a function of the engine operating point.
High pressure system High pressure fuel circuits use predominantly demand regulated high pressure pumps as well as continuous delivery high pressure pumps. However, continuous delivery high pressure pumps can still be found in first generation gasoline direct injection systems.
The high pressure system comprises the fuel rail . The continuous delivery system also requires a separate pressure control valve.
Depending on the engine's operating point, the pressure varies typically in a continuous supply system in a range of 5 to max. 11 MPa , and in a demand regulated system up to max.
1 Suction jet pump, 2 Electric fuel pump  with fuel filter, 3 Pressure regulator, 4 Low pressure line, 5 Continuous delivery  high pressure pump, 6 High pressure line, 7 High pressure sensor,  8 Rail, 9 Pressure control valve, 10 High pressure injectors, 11, 12 Flow direction of fuel.
Continuous delivery system: Continuous delivery system The high pressure pump driven by the engine camshaft normally a three barrel radial piston pump . The pump delivery quantity cannot be adjusted. The excess fuel not required for fuel injection and to maintain the pressure is depressurized by the pressure control valve and returned to the low pressure circuit. For this purpose, the pressure control valve is actuated by the engine control unit in such a way as to obtain the injection pressure required at a given operating point. The pressure control valve also serves as a mechanical pressure relief valve.
In continuous delivery systems, most of the operating points cause significantly more fuel to be compressed to high system pressure than is needed by the engine. This results in unnecessary energy consumption and thus higher fuel consumption than demand regulated systems. The excess fuel released via the pressure control valve also contributes to increasing the temperature in the fuel system. For these reasons, only demand regulated high pressure systems are used in modern direct injection engines.
Demand regulated system Demand regulated system In a demand regulated system .
For safety reasons the high pressure circuit incorporates a mechanical pressure relief valve, which is usually integrated directly in the high pressure pump. Should the pressure exceed the permissible level, fuel is returned via the pressure relief valve to the low pressure circuit.
1 Suction jet pump, 2 Electric fuel pump with fuel filter, 3 Pressure relief valve and pressure  sensor , 4 Low pressure line, 5 Demand regulated high pressure  pump with integrated fuel supply  control valve and pressure relief valve, 6 High pressure line, 7 High pressure sensor, 8 Rail, 9 High pressure injectors, 10 Clock module for controlling the electric fuel pump, 11, 12 Flow direction of fuel.
Evaporative emissions : control system Function An evaporative emissions control system  is required for vehicles equipped with a gasoline engine. Its purpose is to intercept and collect fuel degassing from the fuel tank and to comply with the legal stipulations governing emission limits for evaporative loss. In addition, the line from the fuel tank via the carbon canister to atmosphere provides for pressure equalization of the fuel tank which is required on account of temperature induced expansion of the fuel or the tank system itself or while the vehicle is being refueled. Degassing increases when the fuel in the fuel tank is heated. This may be caused by the higher ambient temperatures, the power loss of the fuel pump integrated in the fuel tank or depending on the fuel supply system the return of fuel heated in the engine and no longer required for the combustion process. Degassing also occurs when the ambient pressure drops, for example due to weather influences or when driving uphill.
Design and operating principle The evaporative emissions control system consists of a carbon canister, into which the vent line from the fuel tank projects, as well as a canister purge valve that is connected both to the carbon canister as well as to the intake manifold . The activated carbon absorbs the fuel vapor. Due to the vacuum prevailing in the intake manifold, fresh air is drawn through the activated carbon when the canister purge valve frees up the line between the carbon canister and the intake manifold when driving. The fresh air picks up the absorbed fuel and feeds it to the combustion process. This is know as purging the carbon canister.
system 1 Air filter, 2 Engine control unit, 3 Fuel tank vent line, 4 Fuel tank, 5 Throttle device, 6 Canister purge valve, 7 Carbon canister, 8 Line to intake manifold, 9 Intake manifold.
Pressure tank : With hybrid vehicles, which can be run on purely electric power for longer distances, there is in some cases no further opportunity for regeneration. In this case, the usual fuel tank made of plastic is replaced by a pressure resistant steel tank which is connected via a further shutoff valve mounted on the tank to the carbon canister . In the event of increased degassing the pressure in such a tank rises, which counteracts further degassing of the fuel. If the pressure in the tank reaches critical values, the tank pressure is regulated by the engine ECU, whereby the additional shutoff valve opens and the fuel vapors are channeled into the carbon canister. The tank pressure must also be reduced to refuel the vehicle. For regeneration, operation of the internal combustion engine is then explicitly requested by the engine ECU.
Gasoline filter Function The function of the fuel filter is to filter the fuel that flows into the fuel system. Contaminants in the fuel must be filtered out in order to protect the system and in particular the fuel injectors.
Design Fuel filters for gasoline engines are located on the pressure side after the fuel supply pump. In tank filters are the preferred choice in newer vehicles, i.e., the filter is integrated in the fuel supply module in the fuel tank. In this case, it must always be designed as a lifetime filter, which does not need to be changed over the full service life of the vehicle. Furthermore, in line filters, which are installed in the fuel line, continue to be used. These can be designed as replacement parts or lifetime parts.
The figure shows an application for hybrid vehicles with a steel tank and an additional shutoff valve. 1 Air filter, 2 Engine control unit, 3 Canister purge valve, 4 Shutoff valve, 5 Carbon canister, 6 Fuel tank , 7 Venturi tube, 8 Non return valve, 9 Non return valve, 10 Intercooler, 11 Throttle device, 12 Engine, 13 Exhaust gas turbocharger.
the dirt particles out of the fuel . : The filter element is integrated in the fuel circuit in such a way that fuel passes through the entire surface of the filter medium as much as possible at the same flow velocity.
Filter medium Special resin impregnated cellulose fiber papers which are also bonded for heavier duty applications to a synthetic fiber  layer are used as the filter medium. This bond must ensure high mechanical, thermal and chemical stability. The paper porosity and the pore distribution of the filter paper determine the filtration efficiency and throughflow resistance of the filter.
Fuel filters for gasoline engines are either spiral vee form or radial vee form in design. In a spiral vee form filter, an embossed filter paper is wrapped round a support tube. The fuel flows through the filter in the longitudinal direction. In a radial vee form filter, the filter paper is folded and inserted into the housing in the shape of a star . End rings made of plastic, resin or metal and, if necessary, an inner protective jacket provide stability. The fuel flows through the filter from the outside inwards, during which the dirt particles are separated from the filter medium.
Requirements The required filter fineness is dependent on the fuel injection system. For systems with intake manifold injection, the filter element has a mean pore width of approx. 10 um. Finer filtering is required for gasoline direct injection. The mean pore width here is in the range of 5 um. Particles larger than 5 um must be separated off by up to 85 %. In addition, a filter for gasoline direct injection, when new, must satisfy the following residual dirt requirement: Metal, mineral and plastic particles and glass fibers with diameters of more than 400 um must not be flushed by the fuel out of the filter.
Filter efficiency depends on the throughflow direction. When replacing in line filters, it is imperative that the flow direction specified by the arrow be observed.
1 Fuel outlet, 2 Filter cover, 3 Laser welded edge, 4 Support ring, 5 Seal, 6 Radial vee form filter medium, 7 Pressure stable filter housing, 8 Fuel inlet.
Apart from this, the electric fuel pump is increasingly being used as the pre supply pump for the modern direct injection systems used on diesel and gasoline engines. In the case of gasoline direct injection, sometimes pressures of up to 650 kPa must be provided during hot delivery operation.
Electric motor The plunger and barrel assembly is driven by an electric motor. An armature with copper or carbon commutator is used as standard in this engine. Electronic commutating systems without commutators and carbon brushes are increasingly being used in new vehicles that appear on the market. The design of the electric motor depends on the desired delivery quantity for a given system pressure. It is continuously surrounded by flowing fuel and thereby cooled.
End cover The end cover contains the electrical connection and the pressure side hydraulic connection. The non return valve prevents the fuel lines from draining after the electric fuel pump is switched off; this ensures that the system pressure is maintained for a certain period of time after switch off. A pressure relief valve is integrated as required. Most end covers also include the carbon brushes for the commutation system and interference suppression elements .
1 Electrical connection, 2 Hydraulic connection .
loosely guided in the slot shaped open : ings. The centrifugal force generated by the rotation of the slotted rotor and the fuel pressure press the rollers against the pump housing and the driving flanks of the slots. The rollers operate here as circulating seals. The fuel is delivered in the chamber created between in each case two rollers of the slotted rotor and the pump housing. The pumping effect is created by the fact that, after the inlet opening is sealed, the chamber volume is continuously reduced until the fuel leaves the pump through the outlet opening.
Internal gear pump The internal gear pump consists of an internal drive wheel which engages an eccentrically arranged outer rotor. This outer rotor has one tooth more than the drive wheel. The tooth flanks that are sealed against each other create during the rotation process in their spaces variable chambers which provide the pumping effect.
Positive displacement pumps are advantageous when used with high viscosity media, e.g. cold diesel fuel. They have a good low voltage characteristic, i.e. they have a relatively "flat" delivery rate characteristic over the operating voltage. Efficiency can be as high as 40 %. The unavoidable pressure pulses may cause noise; the extent of this problem varies according to the pump's design configuration and mounting location.
Whereas in electronic gasoline injection systems the positive displacement pump has to a large extent been superseded by the flow type pump for the classical electric fuel pump requirements, it has gained a new field of application as the pre supply pump on diesel common rail systems with their significantly greater pressure requirements and viscosity range.
1 Slotted rotor ,  8 Gas discharge orifice.
UMK0267 5Y a 1 b c A B B A B A B A A B B A 3 4 5 7 6 8 6 7 5 7 2
the plunger and barrel assembly at sys : tem pressure. A small gas discharge orifice, located at a specified angular distance from the suction opening, improves performance when pumping hot fuel; this orifice facilitates the discharge of any gas bubbles that may have formed .
Pressure builds up along the passage as a result of the exchange of pulses between the impeller blades and the liquid particles. This leads to spiral shaped rotation of the liquid volume trapped in the impeller and in the passages.
Flow type pumps feature a low noise level since pressure buildup takes place continuously and is practically pulsation free. Pump design is also much less complex than the positive displacement unit. System pressures of up to 650 kPa can be achieved. The efficiency of these pumps can, depending on the operating point, exceed 30 %.
The swirl pot is situated centrally in the fuel tank. The suction side of the electric fuel pump is inserted in this beaker shaped container. When the tank level is high, fuel flows over the beaker edge, when the level is low, fuel passes through a small opening in the beaker base or through the return line of the electric fuel pump into the swirl pot. When the vehicle is cornering, accelerating and braking, the fuel in the fuel tank flows to one side, which, when the tank level is low, could cause the fuel supply to be interrupted. The fuel can only escape slowly from the swirl pot through the small opening such that the fuel supply is safeguarded for a certain period of time.
1 Swirl pot, 2 Fuel filter, 3 Electric fuel pump, 4 Suction jet pump, 5 Fuel pressure regulator, 6 Fuel level sensor, 7 Prefilter.
High pressure pumps for : gasoline direct injection The function of the high pressure pump is to compress the fuel supplied in sufficient quantity by the electric fuel pump at an rpmand temperature dependent admission pressure . Subsequent further development of the second generation increases the pressure range to 25 MPa and improves the acoustics of the fuel supply control valve. The third generation increases the pressure range to 35 MPa, facilitates a greater delivery quantity, and once again improves the acoustics.
The high pressure pump is a cam driven single barrel pump running in oil , an integrated pressure relief valve on the high pressure side and an integrated fuel ressure attenuator on the low pressure side. To comply with future stringent fuel standards and in response to emission control legislation, the pump is made of stainless steel and is welded at all the emission relevant connection points.
2nd generation gasoline direct injection systems a) View with low pressure port, b)  View with high pressure port , 11 Delivery plunger, 12 Plunger seal, 13 Plunger spring. UMK2039 4Y 2 2 1 3 4 5 a b 9 7 8 8 8 8 6 6 10 11 12 13
With a quadruple cam, time synchronization of delivery and injection is possible in a four cylinder engine, i.e., each injection is also accompanied by a delivery. In this way, it is possible due to the pressure dip in the rail on the one hand to reduce excitation of the high pressure circuit and on the other hand to reduce the rail volume.
In order to ensure that the system pressure can still be sufficiently quickly achieved or varied with the engine at maximum fuel demand, the maximum delivery quantity of the high pressure pump is configured for maximum demand plus necessary factors which affect delivery behavior .
Fuel supply control valve: Fuel supply control valve Demand control of the high pressure pump is effected with the fuel supply control valve . The fuel delivered by the electric fuel pump is drawn into the delivery chamber via the inlet valve of the open fuel supply control valve. In the subsequent delivery stroke, the fuel supply control valve remains open after bottom dead center so that fuel that is not needed at the relevant load point is returned at admission pressure to the low pressure circuit. After the fuel supply control valve is actuated, the inlet valve closes, the fuel is compressed by the delivery plunger and delivered to the high pressure circuit. The inlet valve then remains closed during the delivery stroke on account of the pressure in the delivery chamber even when the fuel supply control valve is non energized. The engine management system calculates the time from which the fuel supply control valve is actuated as a function of delivery quantity and rail pressure. The start of delivery is varied here for demand control.
sure pump, together with the delivery plunger designed as a stepped plunger , attenuate the pressure pulsations stimulated by the high pressure pump in the low pressure circuit and at high rotational speeds ensure a good delivery chamber charge.
The fuel pressure attenuator takes up the fuel quantity diverted at the relevant operating point via the deformation of its gas filled metal diaphragms and releases it again in the induction stroke to fill the delivery chamber. Operation with variable admission pressure i.e., the use of demand regulated low pressure systems is possible here.
Continuous delivery high pressure pump Design and operating principle Design and operating principle The Bosch continuous delivery high pressure pump is used in systems for gasoline direct injection for injection pressures up to 12 MPa .
high pressure pump for 1st generation gasoline direct injection systems  .
have to be placed on the pump connec : tions and piping. Furthermore, there is no need for a low pressure attenuator. On the downside, continuous delivery at high pressure means that it has a higher power loss than a demand regulated pump.
When the pump operates at constant rail pressure or at part load, the pressure of the excess fuel is reduced to admission pressure level by the pressure control valve mounted on the rail and returned to the intake side of the high pressure pump. The pressure level in the high pressure circuit is regulated and adjusted by means of the engine control unit, which specifically actuates the pressure control valve. Pressure control valve Pressure control valve The pressure control valve is a proportional control valve which is closed at zero current and actuated by means of a pulse width modulated signal. During operation, the energizing of the solenoid coil sets a magnetic force which relieves the load on the spring, lifts the valve ball off the valve seat, and thereby alters the flow cross section. The pressure control valve sets the desired rail pressure as a function of the pulse duty factor. The excess fuel delivered by the high pressure pump is diverted via the drain hole into the low pressure circuit.
A pressure limiting function is integrated by way of the valve spring to protect the components against unacceptably high rail pressures, for example, in the event of actuation failure. If one or more of the pump barrels should fail, emergency operation is possible with the intact barrels or by means of the electric fuel pump with admission pressure.
Fuel rail Intake manifold injection The function of the fuel rail is to store the fuel required for injection, to attenuate pulsations and to ensure uniform distribution to all the fuel injectors. The fuel injectors are mounted directly on the rail. Next to the fuel injectors it is possible in systems with fuel return to integrate a fuel pressure regulator and if necessary a fuel pressure attenuator in the rail.
Local pressure fluctuations caused by resonance when the fuel injectors open and close is prevented by careful selection of the fuel rail dimensions. As a result, irregularities in injected fuel quantity which can arise as a function of load and engine speed are avoided.
1 Electrical connection, 2 Valve spring, 3 Solenoid coil, 4 Solenoid armature, 5 Valve needle, 6 Sealing ring , 7 Drain hole, 8 Valve ball, 9 Valve seat, 10 Inlet with inlet strainer.
In part these solid, constructed or deepdrawn attachments are also designed as function modules . The fuel injectors are sealed by O rings, the pressure sensor and the high pressure connection by a screwed ball taper geometry.
A particular feature is the "suspended design" of the injector mounting, which ensures a low load thanks to its pressure compensated construction. The drawback of this variant is the increased amount of space required.
The biggest challenge in the development of rails is the large number of necessary solutions in that it must always be integrated in the engine in an already specified installation space.
Fuel pressure regulator: Function With intake manifold injection the amount of fuel injected by the fuel injector depends on the injection period and the pressure differential between the fuel pressure in the fuel rail and the back pressure in the intake manifold. On fuel systems with fuel return, the influence of pressure is compensated for by a fuel pressure regulator which maintains the differential between fuel pressure and intake manifold pressure at a constant level. This pressure regulator permits just enough fuel to return to the fuel tank so that the pressure drop across the fuel injectors remains constant. In order to ensure that the fuel rail is efficiently flushed, the fuel pressure regulator is normally located at the end of the rail.
On returnless fuel systems, the fuel pressure regulator is part of the fuel supply module in the fuel tank. The fuel rail pressure is maintained at a constant level with reference to the ambient pressure. This means that the pressure differential between fuel rail pressure and intake manifold pressure is not constant and must be taken into account when the injection duration is calculated.
Mounting on the rail The fuel pressure regulator is of the diaphragm controlled overflow type. A rubber fabric diaphragm divides the pressure regulator into a fuel chamber and a spring chamber. Through a valve holder integrated in the diaphragm, the compression spring forces a movable valve plate against the valve seat. As soon as the pressure applied to the diaphragm by the fuel exceeds the spring force, the valve opens again and permits just enough fuel to flow back to the fuel tank that equilibrium of forces is achieved again at the diaphragm.
The spring chamber is pneumatically connected with the intake manifold behind the throttle valve. As a result, the intake manifold vacuum also has an effect in the spring chamber. There is therefore the same pressure ratio at the diaphragm as at the fuel injectors. This means that the pressure drop across the fuel injectors is solely a function of spring force and diaphragm surface area, and therefore remains constant.
mounting on the rail 1 Intake manifold port , 2 Compression spring, 3 Spring chamber, 4 Valve holder, 5 Rubberfabric diaphragm, 6 Valve, 7 Nozzle, 8 Fuel feed to fuel chamber, 9 Fuel return.
Installation in the fuel supply module: For applications in the fuel supply module the fuel pressure regulator can have a simpler design that the pressure regulator mounted on the rail. These simple pressure regulators against the valve plate. An annular gap opens when the fuel pressure exceeds the spring force that presses the valve plate against the seal seat. The fuel flows through this annular gap and returns through the pressure regulator housing directly to the swirl pot.
Fuel pressure attenuator Function, design and operating principle The repeated opening and closing of the fuel injectors, high pressure pump pulsations and the periodic supply of fuel when electric positive displacement fuel pumps are used lead to fuel pressure oscillations. These can cause pressure resonances which adversely affect fuel metering accuracy. It is even possible that under certain circumstances noise can be caused by these vibrations being transferred to the fuel tank and the vehicle bodywork through the mounting elements of the electric fuel pump, fuel lines, and fuel rail. These problems are alleviated by the use of special design mounting elements and fuel pressure attenuators.
The fuel pressure attenuator has a similar design to the fuel pressure regulator. Here too, a spring loaded diaphragm separates the fuel chamber from the air chamber. The spring force is set in such a way that the membrane rises from its seat as soon as the fuel delivery pressure reaches its working range. This means that the fuel chamber is variable and not only absorbs fuel when pressure peaks occur, but also releases fuel when the pressure drops. In order to always operate in the most favorable range when the absolute fuel pressure fluctuates due to conditions at the manifold, the spring chamber can be provided with an intake manifold connection.
Similar to the fuel pressure regulator, the fuel pressure attenuator can also be attached to the rail or installed in the fuel line. In the case of gasoline direct injection, it can also be attached to the high pressure pump.
applications in the fuel supply module 1 Adjusting screw , 2 Compression spring, 3 Valve plate, 4 O ring, 5 Prefilter, 6 Housing, 7 Discharge to swirl pot.
Basic principles: A / F , i. e. 14.7 kg of air are required to burn 1 kg of fuel. Or: 1 l of fuel burns completely in roughly 9,500 l of air. The specific fuel consumption is essentially dependent on the air fuel ratio. Excess air is required in order to ensure genuine complete combustion, and thus as low a fuel consumption as possible. However, limits are imposed due to the flammability of the mixture and the available combustion time.
The A / F mixture also has a decisive impact on the efficiency of exhaust gas treatment systems. State of the art technology is represented by the three way catalytic converter. However, it needs a specific stoichiometric A / F ratio in order to operate at maximum efficiency. This can reduce damaging exhaust gas components by higher than 99 %. The homogeneous engines available today are therefore operated with a stoichiometric mixture as soon as their operating status allows this. By way of departure, individual direct injection engines are also operated with a lean mixture in the interest of fuel economy.
Certain engine operating statuses require mixture adaptation. Selective modifications to the mixture composition are required e. g. in the case of a cold engine. Excess air factor l The excess air factor or air ratio l . l denotes the ratio of air mass in the cylinder to the air requirement in the case of stoichiometric combustion.
on pollutant composition Uneven running 0.6 Specific fuel consumption be, uneven running 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 be Leanmisfire limit Excess air factor l UMK0032 5E UMK1920 1E
However, this also entails increased con : sumption. Enrichment is therefore only performed for high load points for which an exhaust gas temperature of over 900 degC would be reached.
This excess air factor is characterized by reduced fuel consumption , but also by reduced power output. The maximum value for l the "lean misfire limit" that can be achieved is very strongly dependent on the construction of the engine and the mixture formation system used. The mixture is no longer  ignitable at the lean misfire limit because of the lower number of HC molecules.
To achieve this, the inducted air mass is recorded precisely and an exactly  metered fuel mass is apportioned by means of l regulation in the engine management system.
Intake manifold injection For optimum combustion in engines with intake manifold injection, not only is a precise injected fuel quantity necessary, but also a homogeneous A/F mixture.
This requires efficient fuel atomization. If this precondition is not satisfied, large fuel droplets will precipitate on the intake manifold or on the combustion chamber walls. These large droplets cannot fully combust and will result in increased hydrocarbon emissions .
Unfortunately, in this case of a globally lean mixture, only two of the three ways of the three way catalytic converter function. CO emissions and unburnt hydrocarbons can still be oxidized since sufficient oxygen is available. However, the third chief reaction, reducing the NOx emissions, cannot be carried out sufficiently in leanoperation mode, since insufficient reduction partners are available. For this reason, in addition to catalytic exhaust gas treatment with a three way catalytic converter, a further exhaust gas treatment facility must be installed for NOx reduction .
Mixture formation systems: It is the job of fuel injection systems, or carburetors, to provide an A / F mixture which is adapted as well as possible to the relevant engine operating status. Without fuel injection systems, particularly electronic systems, it would not be possible to maintain the increasingly narrowly defined limits for mixture composition and thus to adhere to the stipulations of the emission control legislation. These requirements and the significant improvements in fuel metering and mixture formation together with the benefits in terms of fuel consumption, driving performance and power output have meant that, in the automotive sector, gasoline injection has completely superseded the carburetor in moder engines.
mixture formation, i. e. where the fuel is  injected directly into the combustion chamber , are designed to reduce fuel consumption even further and to increase power output, and have therefore become increasingly more important.
1 Fuel, 2 Air, 3 Throttle device, 4 Intake manifold, 5 Fuel injectors, 6 Engine, 7 High pressure fuel injectors.
Systems that are based on mechanicalcontinuous fuel injection are no longer of any significance for new developments.
Requirements The high requirements for engine smoothrunning and exhaust emissions make high demands on the A / F mixture composition in each power cycle. Precise injection  timing is vital, as well as precise metering of the injected fuel mass as a factor of the engine intake air. In electronic multipoint fuel injection systems, therefore, not only is each engine cylinder assigned an electromagnetic fuel injector, but this fuel injector is also activated individually for each cylinder. The engine control unit has the task of calculating both the required fuel mass for each cylinder and the correct start of injection for the fuel mass drawn in and the current engine operating status. The injection time required to inject the calculated fuel mass is a function of the opening cross section of the fuel injector and the pressure differential between the intake manifold and the fuel supply system.
Fuel system In intake manifold injection systems, fuel is sent via the electric fuel pump .
Fuel injection: The exactly metered fuel mass is injected directly upstream of the cylinder intake valve. The required air fuel mixture can therefore be formed at the right time by varying the point of injection.
The amount of time available for mixture formation can be increased by injecting the fuel into the intake valves that are still closed. How much air fuel mixture is created directly after injection depends on the quality of the fuel injector . In this case, the primary evaporation occurs only when the intake valves open in response to the high flow velocities with an initially very small valve gap.
Wall coating effects in the intake duct, particularly in cold start conditions, cannot be neglected either. As fuel does not evaporate sufficiently, more fuel is required initially in the starting phase in order to create an ignitable A / F mixture. When the intake manifold pressure then drops, parts of the previously formed wall film will vaporize. This may result in increased HC emissions if the catalytic converter is not running at operating temperature.
able fuel injectors which will control and : minimize manifold wall fuel condensation in the area of the intake duct and the intake valves.
Gasoline direct injection In gasoline direct injection . There are  basically two main operating modes. Fuel injection in the intake stroke is called homogeneous operation, while fuel injection during compression is called stratifiedcharge operation. There are also various special modes, which are either a mixture of the two main operating modes or a slight variation of them.
mixture formation point of view, there are some differences. For instance, there is no flow process around the intake valve to promote mixture formation, and there is much less time available for the mixture formation process itself. Whereas injection can take place across the overall  720deg crankshaft of the four operating cycles in the case of intake manifold  injection, only an injection window of 180deg crankshaft remains in the case of gasoline  direct injection.
Fuel injection is only permitted in the induction stroke. This is because, prior to this, the exhaust valves are open and  unburned fuel would otherwise escape into the exhaust gas train. This would cause high HC emissions and catalytic converter problems. In order to deliver a sufficient quantity of fuel in this shortened period, the fuel flow through the injector must be increased for gasoline direct injection. This is achieved mainly by increasing fuel pressure. The increase in pressure brings with it an additional advantage as it increases turbulence in the combustion chamber, which in turn promotes mixture formation. The fuel and air can therefore be completely mixed, even though the air/fuel interaction time is shorter compared with intake manifold injection.
sion), an increase in compression and : thus considerable fuel saving potential. Wall directed combustion process Wall directed combustion process In a wall directed combustion process, fuel is injected into the combustion chamber from the side , the fuel pressure for this system must often be even higher than for homogeneous operation. The increased fuel pressure shortens the injection time and increases interaction with the air because pulse reflection is greater. The disadvantage of the wall directed combustion process is that fuel condenses on the piston wall, which increases HC emissions. As mixture formation time is short, the stratified charge cloud usually contains rich mixture zones at higher loads, and this increases the risk of soot production. At low loads, the pulse of the fuel droplets, which is used as a means of transporting the stratified charge cloud to the spark plug, is low due to the small fuel mass. As a result, the flow must usually be restricted here so that the fuel meets with a lower density of air and thus a lower air resistance.
Air directed combustion process Air directed combustion process In principle, an air directed combustion process works in exactly the same way as a wall directed process. The main difference is that the stratified charge cloud does not interact directly with the piston recess. Instead, it moves on a cushion of air . The cushion of air is generated by the air present in the cylinder. In contrast to the wall directed combustion process, with air directed combustion the fuel spray injection angle is much flatter such that the fuel spray cannot penetrate the full amount of air up to the piston. This solves the problem of fuel condensing on the piston recess.
Compared with wall directed combustion processes, the air flows in air directed combustion processes cannot be fully  reproduced. This gives rise to large variations from injection to injection and thus frequently to poor combustion stability right through to individual misfires. Often, the actual combustion processes are a mixture of wall directed and airdirected processes, depending on the operating point in each case.
Spray directed combustion process Spray directed combustion process The spray directed combustion process is visually different from the other two processes in that the injector is installed at a different location. It is located top center and injects vertically down into the combustion chamber , an air fuel mixture forms around the fuel spray already during the injection process. Located directly next to the injector is the spark plug, which ignites the air fuel mixture.
As a result, with the spray directed combustion process the mixture formation time is very short. This requires an even higher fuel pressure for the spray directed combustion process. This combustion process can eliminate the disadvantages of fuel condensing on the manifold walls, air flow dependency, and flow restriction at low loads. It therefore has the greatest potential for fuel saving. Nevertheless, the short mixture formation time is a huge challenge for the fuel injection and ignition systems.
Other operating modes In addition to homogeneous and stratified charge operation, there are also special operating modes. They include "changeover between operating modes" , and "homogeneous lean mode". These operating modes are sometimes very complex and only ever represent short, temporary states. Therefore they are frequently not operating modes for longer operation.
Fuel injectors: Essentially, the mixture formation components must ensure that the air fuel mixture is formed in the most optimal way possible to facilitate combustion. In intake manifold injection, this is mainly the task of the fuel injector, while in gasoline direct injection, the high pressure fuel injector can be assisted by a turbulence flap.
Essentially, there are two different ways of actuating the fuel injectors. If one injector is operated by means of a conventional electromagnet, the other has a piezoelectric stack serving as the actuator.
Intake manifold fuel injector Design and function Design and function Essentially, electromagnetic fuel injectors are comprised of the following components: the valve housing with electrical connection and hydraulic port, the solenoid coil, the moving valve needle with solenoid armature and valve ball, the valve seat with injection orifice plate, and the valve spring.
fuel injector, as is used in intake manifold injection. The new reduced size fuel injector variant EV SE on the hydraulic port seals off the injector at the fuel rail. The lower sealing ring provides the seal between the injector and the intake manifold.
a) Fuel injector, standard version EV 14 fT , 8 Valve spring, 9 Solenoid coil, 10 Valve needle with solenoid armature, 11 Valve ball, 12 Valve seat, 13 Injection orifice plate. UMK2350 3Y 3 2 1 a b c 4 7 5 6 10 11 13 12 8 9 2
When the solenoid coil is de energized, : the valve needle and valve ball are pressed against the cone shaped valve seat by the valve spring and the force exerted by the fuel pressure. The fuel supply system is thus sealed off from the intake manifold. When the solenoid coil is energized, this generates a magnetic field which attracts valve needle solenoid armature. The valve ball lifts off the valve seat and the fuel is injected. When the excitation current is switched off, the valve needle closes again due to spring force.
The fuel is atomized by an injection orifice plate. The orifices are stamped out of the plate and ensure that the injected fuel quantity remains highly reproducible. The spray pattern and the atomization quality of the fuel leaving the injector is produced by the number of orifices and their configuration .
The injected fuel quantity per unit of time is determined mainly by the system pressure in the fuel supply system , the back pressure in the intake manifold, and the geometry of the fuel exit area.
Spray formation and  Spray formation and  spray targeting spray targeting An injector's spray formation, i.e. its spray shape, spray angle, and fuel droplet size, influences the formation of the air/fuel mixture. Individual geometries of intake manifold and cylinder head make it necessary to have different types of spray formation. Different spray formation variants are available in order to satisfy with these requirements.
Tapered spray Individual fuel sprays emerge through the openings in the injection orifice plate . These fuel sprays combine to form a spray taper.
a80 80 % of fuel is inside the angle a, a Angle between two individual sprays, b80 80 % of fuel is inside the angle b, g Offset spray angle.
the EV14 fuel injector, optionally with extended injection point a) EV14, fuel injector, compact, extended  injection point, b) EV14, fuel injector, compact, c) EV14, fuel injector, standard, d) EV14, fuel injector, long.
a        b        c       d SMK2356Y
Gamma angle Compared to the injector's principle axis, the fuel spray in this case .
Injectors with this spray shape are mostly used when installation conditions are difficult, for example when the injectors are installed so steeply in the intake manifold that the required spray targeting can only be achieved by the use of a gamma angle spray.
coil rises . After the pickup time has elapsed, the maximum valve needle lift is achieved at the solenoid armature stop at the internal pole. Depending on the solenoid valve design, the current continues to rise after the armature stop because the magnetic circuit at this point is not yet at 100 % saturation. The kink in the current curve is triggered by the armature stop.
Fuel is sprayed as soon as the valve ball lifts off its seat. The quantity of fuel injected during an injection pulse is shown in Figure 11d.
Because the magnetic field is not decreased abruptly after activation is shut down, the valve closes with a delay. The valve is fully closed again after the dropout time has elapsed.
The non linearity during the valve pickup and dropout phases must be compensated for throughout the period that the injector is activated . The speed at which the valve needle lifts off its seat is also dependent on the battery voltage. Battery voltage dependent injection duration extension corrects these influences.
Electromagnetic  high pressure fuel injector The high fuel pressure required for gasoline direct injection and the installation location give rise to extended requirements for the fuel injector component when compared with intake manifold fuel injectors.
Depending on the installation position in the cylinder head lateral or central either short or long valves are used. The long valve is typically based on a short valve which is adapted to the required length with an extension tube for the hydraulic port and an extended conductor bar for the electrical connector. The current generation has an valve tip diameter reduced to 6 mm to satisfy the requirements with regard to installation space in downsizing engines.
When current flows through the coil, it generates a magnetic field in conjunction with the other components of the magnetic circuit. This magnetic field accelerates the solenoid armature when the valve needle is still at rest. When the solenoid armature contacts the upper stop, the latter lifts the valve needle against spring force and the hydraulic load off the valve seat and opens the valve outlet opening. As the fuel pressure is considerably higher than the combustion chamber pressure, the fuel is injected into the combustion chamber. When the current is switched off, the valve needle and the hydraulic load on the valve needle are pushed back into the seat by the return spring, and this stops the injection process. The solenoid armature is returned by the spring to its rest position on the lower stop.
Reproducible fuel quantities can be metered by defining the opening and keeping the opening cross section constant with the needle fully raised. Here, the fuel quantity is dependent on the pressure in the fuel rail, the backpressure reaction in the combustion chamber, and the valve opening time.
fuel injector for gasoline direct injection 1 Electrical connection,  2 Extrusion coating,  3 O ring, 4 Support plate,  5 Conductor barrel,  6 Filter with setting sleeve,  7 Internal pole,  8 Cover,  9 Compression spring, 10 Stop ring, 11 Magnetic sleeve, 12 Solenoid coil, 13 Solenoid armature, 14 Support element, 15 Snap ring, 16 Valve housing, 17 Valve needle, 18 Sealing ring, 19 Valve ball, 20 Valve seat with injection orifices. UMK2161 2Y 4 1 3 2 18 9 10 12 13 14 11 16 17 19 15 20 5 6 8 7
Spray formation: Spray formation Predominantly multi hole valves are used to prepare the fuel. By suitable spray configuration the injection orifice alignment is adapted to match the installation position to the respective combustion chamber. Here the sprays must be configured in such a way that fuel and fresh air mix thoroughly in the combustion chamber and in the process valves, pistons and combustion chamber walls are moistened with fuel as little as possible. The fuel injectors are typically configured with five to seven sprays, depending on the desired throughflow, which is configured to match the output per cylinder and thereby determines the mean orifice diameter. The penetration depth of the sprays can be reduced for individual injection orifices by a diameter that is smaller than the mean diameter of all the injection orifices. This makes it possible to reduce the moistening of the piston and the combustion chamber walls with liquid fuel. Other sprays with a larger orifice diameter are provided to achieve the required throughflow. The injection orifice is for the most part supplemented by a pre stage. The purpose of this pre stage is to keep the injection orifice free from deposits which are produced depending on the boundary operating and environmental conditions and on the fuel used.
Electrical Electrical activation activation To ensure a defined and reproducible injection process, the high pressure fuel injector is activated by a complex current curve. The engine control unit delivers a digital signal for this purpose. An output module uses this signal  for the high pressure fuel injector.
the high pressure fuel injector a) Triggering signal calculated  by the ECU, b) Current curve in the high pressure fuel injector, c) Valve needle lift, d) Injected fuel quantity.
SMK1772 2E Injection time Injected fuel quantity ton 0 0 1 0 b c d Current Needle lift toff a Imax Ih
gine walls are moistened with liquid fuel. : For the fuel injector this means achieving short idle times and more numbers of load cycles to be withstood over the operating time compared with single injection.
Piezo high pressure fuel injector Area of application Area of application The piezo high pressure fuel injector has been used since 2005 in complex combustion processes which impose specific requirements on the quality of the fuel spray and its stability over the engine's service life. Moreover, it combines outstanding very small quantity metering precision with high maximum injected fuel quantities and thus makes possible high specific power output without having to make compromises at low load operating points. An example of highly developed combustion processes is the spray guided stratified lean combustion process, which is achieved exclusively with the piezo high pressure fuel injector in production vehicles.
Design and function Design and function The piezo high pressure fuel injector is operated at 20 MPa is 33 um and is achieved after 180 us. The closing operation also takes 180 us from full lift. Further important components of the valve assembly are a fine filter in the inlet to protect the nozzle against particulates and bellows to isolate the fuel from the dry actuator chamber.
injector  1 Hydraulic port, 2 Plastic coating,  3 Electrical connection, 4 Injector duct seal, 5 Linear compensation element,  6 Actuator foot, 7 Housing,  8 Piezo actuator pretensioning spring, 9 Piezo actuator, 10 Actuator head, 11 Needle closing spring, 12 Mesh filter, 13 Metal bellows, 14 Support element, 15 Valve needle, 16 Combustion chamber seal, 17 Valve body, 18 Injection nozzle.
contacting and insulation of the actuator : against the electrical components are the essential elements of the actuator module. The direct non positive connection between actuator module and valve needle provides for very short activation times from 75 us. In the event of such very short activations the valve needle does not achieve its full lift.
The coupler exerts in the switching chain a defined force which counteracts the closing spring force. In the coupler two steel diaphragms hold a hydraulic fluid which moves a working piston by means of a slow movement between two cavities. This brings about a compensation of the different thermal expansions of the metallic and ceramic components with the result that the coupler force within the switching chain remains to a large extent constant over all the thermal operating conditions of the high pressure fuel injector. In this way, a reproducible valve needle lift and thus a reproducible injected fuel quantity in the different engine operating states are made possible. Fast, short changes of switching chain length by activation of the piezo actuator are not compensated by the coupler in contrast to changes of switching chain length as a result of slow thermal effects. It works in this respect like a high pass filter.
The above mentioned modules are mounted together with the housing components including the fuel supply. A coding process integrated in the production sequence determines the individual charge demand of each piezo high pressure fuel injector in order to compensate production tolerances. Compensating the production tolerances improves the precision of the fuel quantity metering. The charge demand is written in the form of a data matrix code to the fuel injector and read later into the engine ECU.
Spray formation and Spray formation and spray targeting spray targeting The spray of an outward opening nozzle differs by virtue of the principle involved fundamentally from that of a multi hole nozzle: The annular orifice created when the valve needle opens causes a tapered discharge of spray with droplet sizes in the region of 8 to 13 um. A rotationally symmetric hollow taper with a nominal spray angle of 86 deg is created. Spatially permanently assigned boundary vortices, which can be used in the course of a combustion process, form both outside and inside along the taper surfaces . The spray is, thanks to the design of the nozzle, very robust against disturbance, deposit, and aging influences. The is advantageous particularly for the stratified combustion process mentioned at the start, but also for example in catalyst heating mode.
DC/DC converter . Idle times between two opening operations right down to 50 us can be achieved; this is considerably shorter than with a fuel injector with a solenoid operated mechanism.
Finally, a number of adaptation functions which measure the fuel injector in the installed state are used in engine operation to guarantee very small quantity metering precision of the injector's service life. As well as model based compensations of the temperature dependent reactions of the actuator to an electric charge, it is also possible to compensate on a cylinder specific basis very small quantity deviations over the injector's service life which if uncompensated would generate torque differences. The compensations act on the basis of the causative principle either on the valve needle lift or on the activation duration.
0.1 mg 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 ms Injection time Injected fuel quantity per injection 1 2 SMK2135E
Basic principles: Function On a spark ignition engine, the combustion process is initiated by an externally supplied ignition. The ignition is responsible for igniting the compressed A/F mixture at the right time. This is done by producing an electric spark between the electrodes of a spark plug in the combustion chamber.
Consistent, reliable ignition under all conditions is essential to ensure faultfree engine operation. Misfiring leads to combustion misfires and damage or destruction of the catalytic converter, poor exhaust emission figures, higher consumption and lower engine performance. Ignition spark An electric spark can only occur at the spark plug if the necessary ignition voltage is exceeded and can rise from several 100 V to a few kV.
During the ignition spark combustion time , the ignition system energy is converted into the ignition spark. After the spark has broken away, the voltage is damped and drops to zero.
Mixture ignition  and ignition energy The electrical spark between the sparkplug electrodes generates a high temperature plasma. If mixture conditions at the spark plug are suitable and sufficient energy has been supplied by the ignition system, the resulting arc develops into a flame front that propagates independently. The ignition must guarantee this process under all engine operating conditions. Under ideal conditions , provided that the A/F mixture is stationary, homogeneous and stoichiometric, an energy of approx. 0.2 mJ is required to ignite the mixture by means of electric spark for each individual ignition process. In real engine operation, however, much higher energy levels are required. Some of the spark energy is converted at flashover, and the rest in the spark combustion phase.
Larger electrode gaps generate a larger arc, but require higher ignition voltages. Lean A/F mixtures or turbocharged engines have a higher ignition voltage demand. At a given level of energy, the spark duration shortens as the ignition voltage increases. A longer spark duration generally stabilizes the combustion; lack of mixture homogeneity at the moment of ignition in the area of the spark plug can be compensated for by means of a longer spark duration. A/F mixture turbulences such as those which occur in the stratified charge mode with gasoline direct injection can divert the ignition spark to such an extent that it extinguishes. Follow up sparks are then required to ignite the A/F mixture again.
of follow up sparks have resulted in the : design of ignition systems with higher ignition energy. If not enough ignition energy is produced, inflammation will not occur, resulting in engine misfire. The system must therefore deliver enough ignition energy to ensure reliable ignition of the A/F mixture under all operating conditions. Efficient fuel atomization and good access of the A/F mixture to the ignition sparks enhance ignitability, extend spark duration and spark length, and lengthen the electrode gap. The dimensions of the spark plug determine the position , the spark energy of ignition systems lies in a range of approx. 30 to 100 mJ.
Moment of ignition The start of combustion in a spark ignition  engine power cycle. The earliest possible moment of ignition is determined by the knock limit, and the latest possible moment of ignition by the combustion limit or the maximum permissible exhaust gas temperature.
characteristic for various moments of ignition 1 Ignition too retarded.
engine speed and relative air charge Speed Relative air charge Ignition angle UMZ0001 4E UMZ0030 2E bar 40 20 0 75deg 50deg 25deg 0deg 25deg 50deg 75deg before TDC after TDC Ignition angle aZ 2 1 3 Zb Za Zc Pressure in combustion chamber
rable effect. Ignition timing adjustment, : therefore, essentially depends on rotational speed, charge, and the air/fuel ratio .
Ignition timing corrections and operating point dependent moments of ignition Electronic engine management systems can take other effects on the moment of ignition into consideration in addition to rotational speed and charge. The basic moment of ignition can either be modified by means of additive corrections or replaced for certain operating points or ranges by special ignition angles or ignition maps. Examples of ignition timing corrections are knock control, the correction angle for the gasoline direct injection homogeneous lean operation, and warm up. Examples of special ignition angles or ignition maps are gasoline direct injection stratified charge operation, and starting operation. Final implementation depends on the prevailing application. Exhaust gas and fuel consumption The moment of ignition has a considerable impact on exhaust gas because it can be used to control the various untreated exhaust gas constituents directly. However, the various optimization criteria, such as exhaust gas, fuel economy, drivability, etc., may not always be compatible, so it is not always possible to derive the ideal moment of ignition from them.
40deg 30deg 20deg Excess air factor l 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 az NOx emissions UMK1444 3E UMK1445 2E UMK1446 2E
Knock control Basic principles Basic principles Electronic control of the moment of ignition offers the possibility of accurate control of the ignition angle as a function of rotational speed, load, temperature, etc. Nevertheless, if there is no knock control, there must still be some means to define a clear safety margin to the knock limit. This margin is necessary to ensure that, even in the most knock sensitive case with regard to engine tolerances, engine aging, environmental conditions, and fuel quality, no cylinder can reach or exceed the knock limit. The resulting engine design leads to lower compression, retarded moments of ignition, and thus worsening fuel consumption and torque.
These disadvantages can be avoided through the use of knock control. Experience shows that knock control increases engine compression. This results in lower fuel consumption and higher torque. Now, however, the pilot control ignition angle no longer has to be determined for the conditions most sensitive to knocking but rather for the conditions least sensitive to knocking . Each individual engine cylinder can now be operated throughout its service life in virtually all operating ranges at its knock limit, and thus at optimum efficiency. For this type of ignition angle adjustment, a reliable method of knock detection is essential. It should detect knock for each cylinder throughout the engine's operating range starting from a specified knock intensity.
Knock control system Knock control system A knock control system consists of knock sensor, signal evaluation, knock detection, and ignition angle control system with adaptation facility .
system 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 Nm 20deg 30deg 40deg 50deg Torque Excess air factor l az 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 20 30 40 50 az Excess air factor l 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 340 420 500 580 660 g/kWh Specific fuel consumption Actuator Ignition Engine controlled system Knock sensor Knock control in ECU Ignition angle control with adaptation Signal evaluation and knock detection UMK1442 2E UMK1443 2E UMZ0018 1E
Knock sensor: Knock sensor A typical symptom of combustion knock is high frequency vibrations which are superimposed on the high pressure curve in the combustion chamber pick up the characteristic vibrations of knocking combustion and convert them into electrical signals.
A wide band sensor, with a typical frequency band of 5 to 20 kHz, and a resonance sensor, which preferably transmits only one knock signal resonant frequency. When combined with the flexible signal evaluation system in the control unit, it is possible to evaluate different or several resonant frequencies from one wideband knock sensor. This improves knock detection performance, which is why the wide band knock sensor is increasingly replacing the resonance sensor.
To ensure sufficient knock detection in all cylinders and across all operating ranges, the number and location of the required knock sensors must be carefully determined for each engine type. Fourcylinder in line engines are usually fitted with one or two knock sensors, while 5and 6 cylinder engines are fitted with two, and 8and 12 cylinder engines with four knock sensors.
Signal evaluation Signal evaluation For the duration of a timing range in which knock can occur, a special signal evaluation circuit in the control unit evaluates from the wide band signal the frequency band with the best knock information and generates a representative variable for each combustion process. This very flexible signal evaluation of the wide band sensor enables high detection quality. When using a resonance knock sensor that transmits just one resonant frequency for analysis of all cylinders assigned to it across the entire engine map, knock detection is normally no longer possible at higher engine speeds.
2 3 4 5 1 UMZ0199Y UMZ0270 5E 1 1 1 13 3 2 b c d 3 4 2 3 4 2 1 Ignition angle Cycles Knocking on cylinder 2 4 Cyl.
tection algorithm as "knock" or "no knock" : for each cylinder and for each combustion process. This is done by comparing the variable for the current combustion process with a variable which represents combustion without knock.
Ignition angle control system with Ignition angle control system with adaptation facility adaptation facility If combustion knock is detected in a cylinder, the moment of ignition for that cylinder is retarded . When knock stops, the moment of ignition is advanced again in stages up to the precontrol value. The knock detection and knock control algorithms are matched in such a way as to eliminate any knock that is audible and damaging to the engine, even though each cylinder is operated at knock limit within the optimum efficiency range.
Real engine operation produces different knock limits, and thus different moments of ignition for individual cylinders. In order to adapt precontrol values for the moment of ignition to a particular knock limit, the ignition retard values are stored for each cylinder dependent on the operating point. They are stored in non volatile program maps in the permanently powered RAM for load and engine speed. In this way, the engine can be operated at optimum efficiency for each operating point and without audible combustion knocks, even if there are rapid load and engine speed changes.
This adaptation even enables the use of fuels with lower antiknock properties in combination with direct injection and supercharging. Supercharging allows for a reduction in displacement without lowering performance level. The engine can therefore be operated in part load at higher loads with higher part load efficiency, and fuel consumption can be reduced. The charge air pressure increase to improve efficiency is however limited by the phenomenon of pre ignition.
A few years ago the terms "extreme knocker" or "superknocker" were used, but they described the symptom and not the cause of the phenomenon of pre ignition. However, the term "pre ignition" has become the established term for some time now. In the name there is therefore also a clear distinction from normal combustion knock.
Pre ignition Pre ignition Pre ignitions are uncontrolled auto ignitions of the air fuel mixture, which occur before the ignition that is triggered by the spark plug. Compared to normal combustion, this premature initiation of combustion leads to a considerable increase in pressure and temperature, which then leads to severe combustion knock in the subsequent combustion process. In doing so, individual events can pre damage the engine.
Detection of pre ignitions Detection of pre ignitions Reliably detecting pre ignitions is absolutely necessary in order to prevent engine damage. Knocking events as a result of pre ignitions can be clearly evaluated and detected based on knock sensors by means of position and frequency ranges. This process allows for a high level of detection quality with a clear distinction from normal combustion knock.
Measures to prevent pre ignitions: Measures to prevent pre ignitions If pre ignitions are detected, countermeasures are necessary in order to prevent further pre ignitions. However, since pre ignition is an uncontrolled auto ignition, there is no direct manipulated variable e.g. the ignition angle at combustion knock that can be used to reliably prevent further pre ignitions. For this reason, the pre ignition functionality involves initiating multiple countermeasures after detected pre ignitions in order to quickly reduce the temperature level in the combustion chamber and thus prevent further pre ignitions. The various measures, such as mixture enrichment or charge lowering, can be activated in the combination that is ideal for the respective engine type. Pre ignitions are heavily dependent on fuel and on oil emissions. This functionality is therefore absolutely necessary to protect the engine, especially for turbocharged gasoline engines. This enables vehicle manufacturers to develop efficiency optimized, supercharged gasoline engines and to market them worldwide despite different fuel and oil grades. Ignition systems On modern vehicles, the ignition systems are almost always incorporated as subsystems of the engine management system. Autonomous ignition systems are now only used for special applications or other special designs such as magnetos are used for small engines. The next section will focus on coil ignition alone.
stroboscopic lamps, dwell angle/rotational speed testers, ignition oscilloscopes, etc. When checking the ignition system, remember that dangerously high levels of voltage are present within the system whenever the ignition is on. All tests and inspections should therefore only be carried out by qualified professional personnel.
Before the desired moment of ignition, the : ignition output stage switches a current from the vehicle electrical system through to the primary winding of the ignition coil. While the primary current circuit is closed , a magnetic field builds up in the primary winding.
At the moment of ignition, the current through the primary winding is interrupted again, and the magnetic field energy is discharged, mainly via the magnetic coupled secondary winding . In the process, a high voltage is produced in the secondary winding. Flashover occurs if the ignition voltage supply of the ignition system exceeds the ignition voltage demand of the spark plug. After flashover, the remaining energy is converted at the spark plug while the spark is present. Functions of an ignition system with coil ignition Moment of ignition determination Moment of ignition determination The current moment of ignition in each case is determined from program maps dependent upon the operating point and output.
Dwell period determination Dwell period determination The required ignition energy is made available at the moment of ignition. The amount of ignition energy is dependent upon the amount of primary current at the moment of ignition  and upon the battery voltage at the ignition coil. The dwell periods required to achieve the desired cutoff current are contained in characteristic curves or program maps as a function of the steady state voltage. The change in dwell period with temperature can also be compensated for.
Ignition release The ignition release ensures that the ignition spark occurs at the right cylinder at the right time and with the required level of ignition energy. On electronic controlled systems, a trigger wheel with a fixed angle reference mark . From this, the control unit can calculate the crankshaft angle and the momentary rotational speed. The ignition coil can be switched on and off at any required crankshaft angle. An additional phase signal from the camshaft is required for the unambiguous identification of the cylinder. For each combustion, the control unit uses the desired moment of ignition, the required dwell period and the current engine speed to calculate the switch on time and switches on the output stage. The moment of ignition, or the switchoff point for the output stage, can be triggered either when the dwell period expires or when the desired angle is reached.
with single spark coils 1 Ignition output stage, 2 Ignition coil with primary and secondary windings, 3 Activation arc diode  , 4 Spark plug.
Ignition coil: Function The ignition coil is principally an energy charged high voltage source similar in structure to a transformer. Energy is supplied by the vehicle electrical system during the dwell period or charging time. At the moment of ignition, which at the same time is the end of the charging time, the energy is then transferred with the required high voltage and sparking energy to the spark plug .
The windings must have good electrical insulation to prevent electrical discharge and flashovers either to the inside or to the outside. For this purpose, the windings are usually cast in epoxy resin in the ignition coil housing.
Alternatively, the ignition output stage can be incorporated into the ignition coil instead of the engine control unit. Interference suppression elements may also be incorporated into the ignition coil together with the activation arc diode is calculated in such a way that a specific cutoff current, and thus a specific level of stored energy, will be reached by the end of the operating time. The current is cut off by the ignition output stage, which causes a swift change in the magnetic flux in the ignition coil's iron core. This change in flux results in a voltage induction in the secondary winding. The design of the secondary winding, the geometric arrangement of the secondary winding to the iron core and the primary winding and the materials used in the insulation system and the iron core give rise to inductive and capacitive properties that lead to a voltage supply in excess of 30,000 V on the secondary side.
coil 1 Printed circuit board .
a spark voltage of about 1,000 V. A spark : current then flows and decreases as spark duration increases, until the spark is finally extinguished.
As the current changes over time when the primary current is cut off, an induction voltage occurs at the ignition coil output, similar to the start of charging time. However, this voltage is much smaller than the voltage at the moment of ignition and has an inverse polarity to that voltage. To prevent this "transient voltage" causing unwanted ignition, it is usually suppressed by means of a high voltage diode in the secondary circuit .
The design of an ignition coil can determine its electrical characteristics. In this respect, the requirements in terms of installation space , are decisive.
Individual coils and modules Individual coils and modules In addition to the individual coils, which normally sit directly on the spark plug, several ignition coils can be grouped together in a single housing as a module. They are then mounted directly on the spark plugs, or they may be located a short distance away, in which case the high voltage must be supplied via appropriate cables.
Single spark and dual spark ignition coils Single spark and dual spark ignition coils In addition to ignition coils with just one high voltage output are reduced substantially. Above all, this variant offers cost advantages; however, it must be matched to the overall system to prevent damage from unwanted ignition events caused by backup sparks.
Compact coil and pencil coil Compact coil and pencil coil Ignition coils are also distinguishable by their basic design. For example, there is the conventional compact coil, that features an equal sided coil body and an O I core or C I core magnetic circuit. The coil body sits in the engine above the spark plug well. Another type is the pencil coil whose coil body projects into the spark plug well. Here, too, the windings are located on an I or pencil core, with a plate  arranged concentrically around the windings serving as a magnetic yoke.
Ignition coils with ignition output stage Ignition coils with ignition output stage Ignition coils are available with or without the ignition output stage. The reason for integrating the output stage is to relieve the strain on the engine ECU. Additionally, further electronic circuitry is used in the ignition coil in order to meet the existing requirements .
Requirements : The principal requirements of modern ignition systems are derived indirectly from necessary emission and fuel reductions. Requirements of ignition coils are derived from relevant engine solutions, such as high pressure supercharging and lean burn and stratified charge operation .
ature cutoff, cutoff current regulation) Furthermore, motor vehicles are subject to increased demands with regard to electromagnetic compatibility .
The integration of increasingly more electronic circuitry in ignition coils gives rise to more stringent demands with regard to the interference immunity of these components. In the interests of avoiding impaired functioning and malfunctions, the electronic circuity must be immune to the emissions of the ignition system itself and to the interference emitted by other vehicle components.
stage in a pencil ignition coil housing 1 Connector, 2 SMD components , 3 Electronic circuitry for ignition functions, 4 Primary winding contacts, 5 Yoke plate of pencil ignition coil transformer, 6 Attachment lug, 7 Ignition output stage.
Spark plug: Function The spark plug transfers the ignition coil energy into the combustion chamber in a spark ignition engine. The high voltage applied creates an electric spark between the spark plug electrodes, which ignites the compressed A/F mixture and thereby initiates combustions.
In combined operation with the other engine components, e.g. the ignition and the mixture formation systems, the spark plug determines the function of the spark ignition engine to a decisive extent. It must provide for reliable cold starting, guarantee misfire free operation over its entire service life , and not exceed the maximum permissible temperature even during extended operation at critical operating points. Furthermore, the spark plug must always reliably insulate the high voltage against the cylinder head and seal the combustion chamber towards the outside. Requirements The spark plug must satisfy a variety of challenging performance demands. It is exposed to the varying periodic processes within the combustion chamber, as well as external climatic conditions.
When spark plugs are used with electronic ignition systems, ignition voltages of up to 40 kV can occur; these high voltages must not cause ceramic or insulator head flashovers. The deposited residues from the combustion process such as soot, carbon and ash from fuel and oil additives are electrically conductive under certain thermal conditions. Nevertheless, no flashovers via the insulator are permitted to occur. The electrical resistance of the insulator must be sufficiently high up to 1000 degC and is only permitted to drop slightly over the spark plug's service life.
1 Terminal stud  .
mance. The connection end of the spark : plug should heat up as little as possible. As well as these requirements, the spark plug must also be adapted to the geometric specifications of the engine design . In view of these requirements resulting from the great variety of engines a wide range of spark plugs is required.
Design The spark plug consists of at least two electrodes .
Terminal stud and Terminal stud and high voltage terminal high voltage terminal The steel terminal stud has at the end projecting out of the insulator a thread . Spark plugs with metal shields are available for watertight systems and for maximum interference suppression.
Conductive glass seal Conductive glass seal This electrically conductive glass seal acts as a mechanical support for the components, while providing a gas seal against the high combustion pressure. It can also incorporate resistor elements for interference suppression and burn off.
Insulator Insulator The insulator consists of a special ceramic. Its function is to insulate the center electrode and the terminal stud electrically against the spark plug shell. The requirements of good thermal conductivity with simultaneously high insulation resistance are in stark contrast to the properties of most insulating materials. The material used by Bosch consists of aluminum oxide , to which other substances are added in small quantities.
At the connection end, the insulator has a lead free glaze to repel moisture and dirt. This avoid insulator flashovers to a great extent.
Spark plug shell Spark plug shell The shell is made of steel. The lower part of the shell has a thread so that the spark plug can be secured in the cylinder head and exchanged after a specified change interval. Depending on the spark plug concept, up to four ground electrodes are welded onto the end face of the shell.
To protect the shell against corrosion, its surface is nickel plated so as to prevent the thread from seizing in the aluminum cylinder heads. The upper part of the shell features a hexagon or bi hexagon head for application of a wrench. The bi hexagon head requires less space in the cylinder head while the insulator head geometry remains unchanged, allowing the engine design engineer greater freedom in designing the cooling ducts.
The upper part of the shell is flanged after the plug is fitted and locates the latter in its position. The subsequent shrinking process by inductive heating under high pressure creates the gastight connection between the insulator and the shell, and guarantees good heat conduction.
Seal seat: Seal seat Depending on the engine design, the spark plug has a flat or conical seal seat, which provides the seal against the cylinder head. In the case of the flat seal seat, a "captive" sealing ring is used as the sealing element. It has a special shape and provides a permanently elastic seal when the spark plug is fitted. In the case of the conical seal seat, a conical shell surface provides a direct seal on a corresponding surface of the cylinder head without the use of a sealing ring. Electrodes Electrodes The electrodes subjected to high thermal load are primarily made of a nickel based multi alloy. Through the addition by alloying of manganese and silicon the chemical resistance of nickel is improved, above all against the highly aggressive sulfur dioxide . Additives made of aluminum and yttrium additionally increase the resistance to scaling and oxidation.
Compound electrodes with a jacket material made of a nickel alloy and a copper core are used to improve heat dissipation and consequently wear performance.
Center electrode The center electrode is anchored with its head in the conductive glass seal. For longlife spark plugs it is sensible to use corrosionand oxidation resistant materials like platinum and platinum alloys, which also exhibit high burn off resistance. The center electrode then accommodates a precious metal pin, which is permanently joined to the base electrode by laser welding.
Ground electrodes The ground electrodes are welded to the shell and have predominantly a rectangular cross section. Depending on the arrangement, a distinction is made between front and side electrodes . As well as thermal conductivity, the length, the profile cross section and the number of ground electrode determine their temperature and hence their wear performance. Heat range Operating temperature of the spark plug Operating temperature of the spark plug When the engine is operating, the spark plug is heated by combustion heat. Some of the heat absorbed by the spark plug is diverted to the fresh A/F mixture. Most of the heat is transmitted to the spark plug shell via the center electrode and the insulator, and is diverted to the cylinder head. The operating temperature of the spark plug represents a balance between heat absorption from the engine and heat dissipation to the cylinder head.
ductive connection .
At higher temperatures, the residue containing carbons burn on the insulator nose; the spark plug thus "cleans" itself .
An upper temperature limit of approx. 900 degC should be observed since, in this range, spark plug electrode wear increases drastically .
A low code number denote "hot spark plugs" with high heat absorption through long insulator noses.
The heat range matching the respective engine is determined in the course of application measurements during development. Ionic current measurement procedure Ionic current measurement procedure The Bosch ionic current measurement procedure employs the combustion process as a factor for determining the heat range requirement. The ionizing effect of flames is used to assess how combustion develops over time; this is done by measuring conductivity in the spark gap.
Characteristic changes in the combustion process due to increased thermal loading of the spark plugs can be detected using ionic current and used in the assessment of the auto ignition process.
Thermal ignition Thermal ignition Ignitions of the air/fuel mixture which occur independently of the ignition spark and for the most part on a hot surface are called auto ignitions. These can be subdivided into two categories on the basis of their position in time relative to the moment of ignition.
Post ignition Post ignitions occur after the electrical moment of ignition, but are not critical for practical engine operation since electrical ignition occurs at an increasingly earlier stage. To find out whether thermal ignitions are initiated by the spark plug, individual ignitions are cyclically suppressed during the ionic current measurement. When a post ignition occurs, the ionic current increases significantly only after the moment of ignition. But since a combustion is initiated, a pressure increase and hence a torque output are also to be observed. Pre ignitions Pre ignitions occur before the electrical moment of ignition and can, on account of their uncontrolled progression , but also the maximum combustion chamber pressure to higher values. This increases thermal and mechanical load on the components in the combustion chamber.
response 1 Spark plug with excessively high heatrange code number .
100 % Engine performance Self cleaning temperature 0 degC 500 300 Working range Low temperature shunt, soot deposits Temperature of insulator tip 1 2 3 1100 900 Auto ignition range Safety range UMZ0041 3E
their thermal properties over the course of : their operating life. Thus, for example, oilash deposits in the combustion chamber can increase the compression ratio, which in turn causes a higher temperature load on the spark plug.
The correct heat range for the engine is determined when no failures with sooted spark plugs occur in the concluding coldstart tests with this heat range recommendation.
The use of materials with higher thermal conductivity for the center electrodes provides with the same heat range code number for a significant increase in the insulator nose length, the upshot of which is that the spark plug is less prone to heavy sooting. This reduces the likelihood of combustion misses and misfiring with their attendant massive increases in hydrocarbon emissions and provides benefits in exhaust emissions and fuel consumption in part throttle operation at low load factors.
Electrode gap and ignition voltage The electrode gap is the shortest distance between the center electrode and the ground electrode , the flame core will only be able to propagate very slowly. In extreme cases, so much energy may be drawn off that misfires will occur. During flashover and operation at higher temperature the electrode material is subjected to such high stress that the electrodes wear and consequently the electrode gap gets bigger. As the electrode gap increases the ignition conditions are in fact improved, but the ignition voltage demand increases. As the ignition coil's voltage supply is a fixed amount, the ignition voltage reserve is reduced and the risk of misfiring increases.
The required ignition voltage is influenced not only by the electrode gap, the electrode shape, the temperature, and the electrode material, but also by parameters specific to the combustion chamber, such as mixture composition , flow velocity, turbulence, and density of the ignitable gas.
In modern engine concepts with high mixture density, which frequently feature high charge turbulence, electrode gaps must be carefully defined in order to guarantee reliable ignition, and thus misfire free operation throughout the required service life.
Spark position The position of the spark gap relative to the combustion chamber wall defines the spark position. On modern engines , or by using compound electrodes, or high temperature resistant materials.
Spark plug concepts One or more ground electrodes can be advantageous, depending on the demands placed on the spark plug . The spark plug type is determined by the relative location of the electrodes to each other and the position of the ground electrodes with respect to the insulator.
Air gap spark concept: Air gap spark concept In the air gap spark concept . The advantages here are the lower voltage demand with the same electrode gap, improved ignition properties,and the insulator cleaning effect of the surface gap spark for better repeat cold starting performance.
Surface air gap spark concept Surface air gap spark concept When both forms of discharged are made possible by the specific geometric arrangement of the ground electrodes, this is called the surface air gap spark concept . Depending on operating conditions, the spark behaves either as an air gap spark or a surface gap spark with different ignition voltage demand values. In view of the trend towards increasing combustion chamber pressures, air gap spark concepts are to be preferred since these do not cause spark embedding in the insulator.
Simulation based development  of spark plugs The Finite Element Method is used for spark plugs to calculate temperature and electric fields and to solve structure mechanical problems. Changes to the geometry and materials of spark plugs or even different physical boundary conditions and their effects can thus be determined in advance without complicated tests. This is the basis for a targeted production of test specimens, with which the calculation results are verified by way of example.
Spark plug operating performance Electrode wear Electrode wear As spark plugs operate within an aggressive atmosphere, sometimes at extremely high temperatures, electrodes are subject to wear. This material erosion causes the electrode gap to increase noticeably the longer the spark plug is in service, therefore causing the ignition voltage demand to increase. When this requirement can no longer be met by the supply from the ignition coil, misfiring will occur.
There are essentially two mechanisms that are responsible for electrode wear: spark erosion and corrosion in the combustion chamber. The flashover of electric sparks results in an increase in the temperature of the electrodes up to their melting temperature. The fused microscopically small surface areas react with the oxygen or the other constituents of the combustion gases. The consequence is material erosion.
a) Air gap spark concept with front electrode, b) Surface gap spark concept with side electrodes, c) Surface air gap spark concept with side electrodes.
Changes in operation Changes in operation Dirt and changes in the engine caused by aging can also affect operation of the spark plug. Deposits on the spark plug can result in shunts, and thus in misfiring. This, in turn, may cause a considerable rise in pollutant emissions, and even damage the catalytic converter. For these reasons, spark plugs have a defined service life after which the spark plugs must be replaced.
Irregular operating states Irregular operating states may arise and the engine and the spark plugs may sustain damage due to incorrectly set ignition systems, the use of spark plugs whose heat range is unsuitable for the engine, or the use of unsuitable fuels.
Auto ignition Auto ignition Auto ignition with the result that the air/fuel mixture ignites there under uncontrolled conditions. Severe damage can be caused to the engine and spark plug as a result of auto ignition.
Combustion knock Combustion knock Knocking is characteristic of an uncontrolled combustion process with very sharp rises in pressure .
Versions and applications The different spark plug types are identified by a type designation. This contains all the essential spark plug features . The electrode gap is additionally indicated on the packaging. The spark plug which is suitable for a given engine is specified or recommended by the engine manufacturer and by Bosch.
Standard spark plug for automobiles Standard spark plug for automobiles The spark plug pictured in Figure 1 can be referred to as the standard plug for older, simply built, naturally aspirated engines. The demands imposed on the spark plug are constantly increasing as engines are further developed up to higher specific power outputs due to, for example, improved fuel efficiency and emission control legislation. The most sophisticated engines are direct injection engines with multi stage supercharging and valve timing adjustment.
Spark plugs for direct injection engines Spark plugs for direct injection engines Direct injection engines impose particularly high demands on spark plugs. They must therefore be specially adapted to the needs of the respective engine . This results in different requirements of the spark plug concept for combustion processes with stratified or homogeneous operation.
ignition voltage demand, thermal load ca : pability of the electrodes, mechanical load capability, and service life . For this reason, spark plugs with precious metal electrodes and M12 thread are normally used, and they are also specifically aligned in the combustion chamber when used for spray guided combustion processes with stratified operation.
Spark plugs for gas and flex fuel appliSpark plugs for gas and flex fuel applications cations The spark plug design for natural gas and flex fuel use is comparable with that described previously. For each application the appropriate spark plug version is determined while taking into account the operating conditions within the framework of the application measurements.
As a rule, alternative fuels have higher antiknock properties such that the moment of ignition can be advanced for an optimum combustion. For the most part a lower heat range is recommended for the spark plug in view of the resulting higher thermal load on the spark plug.
Special spark plugs Special spark plugs Special spark plugs are used for particular requirements. These differ in their design, which is dictated by the usage conditions and the installation conditions in the engine. Spark plugs for motor sport Spark plugs for motor sport Engines for sports vehicles are exposed to extreme thermal loads on account of the high proportion of wide open throttle applications involved. Spark plugs for these operating conditions mostly have precious metal electrodes  and a short insulator nose with low heat absorption.
Fully shielded spark plugs Fully shielded spark plugs In the event of very high interference suppression demands, it may be necessary to shield the spark plugs. On fully shielded spark plugs the insulator is wrapped in a metal shielding sleeve. The terminal is located inside the insulator . Fully shielded spark plugs are watertight. Spark plug practice Spark plug installation Spark plug installation When installed correctly and the right type is chosen, the spark plug is a reliable component of the ignition system. The electrode gap can only be re adjusted in spark plugs with front electrodes. On surface gap and surface air gap spark plugs the ground electrodes must not be re adjusted as this will alter the spark plug concept.
Errors and their consequences Errors and their consequences For a particular engine type only the spark plugs approved by the engine manufacturer or recommended by Bosch may be used.
Incorrect heat range code number The heat range code number must without fail match the engine manufacturer's spark plug specification or the recommendation by Bosch. Auto ignitions may result if spark plugs with a heat range code number other than that prescribed for the engine are used.
Incorrect thread length: The thread length of the spark plug must match the thread length in the cylinder head. If the thread is too long, the spark plug will project too far into the combustion chamber. Damage to the piston is a potential consequence. In addition, coked spark plug threads may make it impossible to unscrew the spark plug or cause the spark plug to overheat.
If the thread is too short, the spark plug will not project far enough into the combustion chamber. This may result in poorer mixture ignition. Furthermore, the spark plug will not reach its self cleaning temperature and the lower threads in the cylinder head will sustain coking.
Tampering with the seal seat On spark plugs with conical seal seats neither a plain washer nor a sealing ring may be used. On spark plugs with flat seal seats only the "captive" sealing ring located on the spark plug may be used. It must not be removed or replaced by a plain washer. Without the sealing ring the spark plug projects too far into the combustion chamber, the transfer of heat from the spark plug shell to the cylinder head is compromised, and the spark plug seat provides a poor seal. If an additional sealing ring is used, the spark plug does not project far enough into the threaded hole, and the transfer of heat from the spark plug shell to the cylinder head is likewise compromised.
Assessment of Assessment of spark plug faces spark plug faces The spark plug face refers to the combustion end of the spark plug with the electrodes and the insulator nose. Their appearance in terms of color and deposits provides indications of the spark plug's operating performance and the engine's mixture composition and combustion process. ________________________________ References References www.bosch zuendkerze.de
Catalytic converter: Emission control legislation defines limits governing pollutant emissions from motor vehicles. Engine design measures alone are not sufficient to comply with these limits. In addition to reducing untreated engine emissions, the emphasis in spark ignition engines is on catalytic aftertreatment of the exhaust gas in order to convert the pollutants. Catalytic converters convert the pollutants produced during combustion into harmless components.
Three way catalytic converter Function Function The state of the art technology for engines operating with a stoichiometric A/F mixture is the three way catalytic converter .
Design and operating principle Design and operating principle The catalytic converter comprises a steelplate container as housing, the substrate and the substrate coating . On the monolith is a substrate coating, which enlarges the effective area of the catalytic converter by a factor of up to around 10,000. The catalytic layer on top of this contains the precious metals palladium or in the past platinum and rhodium. Platinum and palladium accelerate the oxidation of HC and CO, while rhodium is responsible for reducing NOx. The amount of precious metal contained in a catalytic converter is approx. 1 to 10 g depending on the engine displacement and the exhaust emissions standard to be met.
The oxygen required for the oxidation process is either present in the exhaust gas as exhaust gas oxygen , or it is taken from the NOx, which is reduced at the same time.
a function of the excess air factor l a) Exhaust gas emission upstream of  three way catalyst, b) Exhaust gas emission downstream of three way catalyst, c) Electrical signal of two step l sensor. Ul Sensor voltage.
The task of the engine management system is, therefore, clear: The mean time value of the resulting l upstream of the catalytic converter must be very precise at one .
The end of the storage and release phase : is either calculated using a model based method or measured with a l oxygen sensor after the catalytic converter.
The various methods to heat up the NOx storage catalytic converter located in the underfloor regions must be careful not to overheat the close coupled catalytic converter.
Catalytic converter operating temperature Catalytic converters do not start significant conversion until they have reached a specific operating temperature . On a three way catalytic converter, this is approximately 300 degC. Ideal conditions for a high conversion rate are achieved at 400 to 800 degC.
In the case of the NOx storage catalytic converter, the favorable temperature range is lower; it reaches maximum storage capacity at 300 to 400 degC. The reason for the lower temperature range is that the maximum storage capacity is reduced at higher temperatures. At temperatures higher than 500 to 550 degC the barium compound is no longer stable, which means that nitrogen oxides can no longer be stored.
Operating temperatures of 800 degC to 1,000 degC result in intensified thermal aging of the catalytic converter. This is caused by sintering of the precious metals and the substrate coating, which reduces the active surface. At temperatures above 1,000 degC, thermal aging increases considerably until the catalytic converter has no effect at all.
Catalytic converter configurations The required operating temperature of the three way catalytic converter limits the installation options. Engine proximate catalytic converters quickly reach operating temperature, but can be exposed to very high thermal loads.
b) 4 into 2 exhaust manifold for power optimized engine design: The positioning of the underfloor catalytic converter only after the second junction is unfavorable for the heating up characteristics, which means that preferably two close coupled catalytic converters are deployed.
c) Engine with more than one cylinder bank : The exhaust gas system runs completely as twin branch with an upstream and an underfloor catalytic converter for each.
d) Engine with more than one cylinder bank : Y shaped junction in the underfloor area to form an overall exhaust gas train with a joint underfloor catalytic converter for both banks.
A widely used configuration of the three : way catalytic converter is the split arrangement with a close coupled catalytic converter and an underfloor catalytic converter. The close coupled catalytic converter is optimized with regard to high temperature stability, the underfloor catalytic converter with regard to "low light off" . Figure 2 shows different possible arrangements of the primary and underfloor catalytic converters. Owing to their lower maximum permissible operating temperature, NOx storage catalytic converters are always installed in the underfloor area.
Catalytic converter heating Whereas a catalytic converter at operating temperature reaches very high conversion rates of almost 100 %, considerably greater amounts of pollutants are emitted in the cold start phase and in the warm up phase. The HC and CO emissions are particularly high when the engine is cold because fuel condenses onto the cold cylinder walls, leaves the combustion chamber unburned and cannot be converted by the cold catalytic converter. It is therefore important to minimize untreated emissions during the warm up phase before the catalytic converter lights off .
Measures are also required to bring the catalytic converter up to operating temperature quickly. The required heat is provided by raising the exhaust gas temperature and increasing the exhaust gas mass flow. This is made possible by the following measures.
Ignition angle adjustment Ignition angle adjustment The main measure for increasing the exhaust gas heat flow is ignition angle adjustment. Combustion is initiated as late as possible and takes place during the expansion phase. The exhaust gas has a relatively high temperature at the end of the expansion phase. Retarded combustion has an unfavorable effect on engine efficiency.
Idle speed increase Idle speed increase A supporting measure is to raise the idle speed and thereby increase the exhaust gas mass flow. The increased engine speed permits a greater ignition angle retardation. However, in order to ensure reliable ignition, the ignition angles are limited to roughly 10 to 15 degKW after TDC. The heat output limited in this way is not always enough to achieve the current emission limits.
Exhaust camshaft adjustment Exhaust camshaft adjustment A further contribution to increasing the heat flow can be achieved, if necessary, with exhaust camshaft adjustment. The process of the exhaust valves opening as early as possible interrupts the retarded combustion early and the mechanical work generated is thus reduced further. The quantity of energy not converted into mechanical work is available as a quantity of heat in the exhaust gas.
Homogeneous split Homogeneous split With gasoline direct injection, there is, in principle, the possibility of multiple injection. This enables the catalytic converter to be quickly heated up to operating temperature without the need for additional components. The "homogeneous split" measure involves initially creating a homogeneous, lean basic mixture by means of injection during the induction stroke. Subsequent injection during the compression stroke generates a stratified charge cloud. This facilitates retarded moments of ignition and results in high exhaust gas heat flows. The exhaust gas heat flows that can be achieved are comparable with those of a secondary air injection.
achieve this temperature, it is necessary : on the one hand to raise the temperature level with retarded ignition angles and on the other hand to introduce the secondary air as closely as possible to the exhaust valves. The exothermic reaction in the exhaust system increases the heat flow to the catalytic converter and therefore shortens its heating period. The HC and CO emissions are for the most part reduced before entering the catalytic converter.
0.9), there is no significant reaction ahead of the catalytic converter. The unburnt fuel constituents oxidize in the catalytic converter and heat it up from the inside. For this purpose, however, the end face of the catalytic converter must first be brought up to a level above the light off temperature by means of conventional measures .
As a rule, a less rich basic mixture is adjusted, because, if the basic mixture is very rich, the exothermic reaction ahead of the catalytic converter occurs reliably only under stable boundary conditions.
Secondary air injection is performed with an electric secondary air pump, which is switched by means of a relay on account of the high power demand. Since the secondary air valve prevents backflow of exhaust gases into the pump, it must remain closed when the pump is deactivated. Either it is a passive non return valve or it is actuated by purely electrical or pneumatic means with an electrically actuated control valve. When the control valve is actuated, the secondary air valve opens in response to the intake manifold vacuum. The secondary air system is coordinated by the engine ECU.
Alternative concepts for active heating Alternative concepts for active heating As a supplement in special cases, an electrically heated catalytic converter is used for quick heating up of the catalytic converter. This has been used previously in individual small series projects.
1 Secondary air pump,  2 Inducted air, 3 Relay,  4 Engine control unit,  5 Secondary air valve,  6 Control valve, 7 Battery,  8 Point of introduction into exhaust pipe, 9 Exhaust valve, 10 To intake manifold connection.
Mixture formation must be followed up in a control loop, because sufficient accuracy cannot be achieved solely by controlling the metering of the fuel. When the l control loop is used, deviations from a specific air/fuel ratio can be detected and corrected through the quantity of fuel injected. The residual oxygen content in the exhaust gas, which is measured with l oxygen sensors , serves as the measure for the composition of the air/fuel mixture.
posed of the voltage jump and the ramp, changes its direction of control for each voltage jump of the two step l sensor. This indicates a change from rich to lean or from lean to rich .
and therefore the jump of the l sensor, caused by the variation in exhaust gas composition, can be control compensated by shaping the manipulated variable's characteristic curve asymmetrically .
catalytic converter and l shift Shift to "lean". tv Dwell time after sensor jump.
low amplitude in conjunction with high dynamic response. The control parameters are calculated and adapted as a function of the engine's operating points. Above all, with this type of l control, compensation for the unavoidable offset of the stationary and non stationary pilot control is far quicker.
trolled enrichment for this purpose. On this basis the control evaluates the deviations from the setpoint value and additionally alters over a dwell time tv additively the controlled rich or lean shift of the first control loop of a two step control or the setpoint value of a continuous action control.
Three sensor l control There are SULEV concepts . The aim of development is, however, the two sensor concept.
Particulate filter for gasoline : engines Function The function of the particulate filter in the gasoline engine with gasoline direct injection is to adhere to the limit values for particulate matter and particulate number laid down in the exhaust emissions standard Euro 6c or Euro 6d. An additional catalytic coating of the particulate filter serves to increase the catalytic converter volume available for the oxidation of CO and HC and the reduction of NOx. A catalytically coated particulate filter can thus replace a three way catalytic converter.
Design The particulate filter for gasoline engines is designed in the same way as the particulate filter in diesel engines . For gasoline applications the ceramic is currently made of cordierite.
Regeneration of the particulate filter Soot is oxidized by oxygen only at temperatures above approximately 550 to 600 degC. In gasoline applications of the particulate filter the temperatures reached in normal operation and the requirement of additional engine measures to increase the exhaust gas temperature are determined by the filter installation position. Usually the filter is positioned downstream of the three way catalytic converter. When installed directly downstream of the threeway catalytic converter temperatures of 550 to 600 degC can be achieved in partload operation without additional measures, while this is only achieved with an installation position in the underfloor area in high load operation. In terms of regeneration performance an installation position directly downstream of the three way catalytic converter therefore exhibits clear advantages, but the space required for this must be available near the engine. Integrating the filter function into the threeway catalytic converter for the four way catalytic converter does exhibit clear advantages with regard to the regeneration performance and near engine installation area, but up to now has only been implemented in individual applications due to the highest thermal load at full load.
The most important engine measure to increase the exhaust gas temperature is, as with heating the catalytic converter, ignition angle retardation, which simultaneously brings about de throttling and an increase in the exhaust gas mass flow and in the case of gasoline direct injection can be combined with multiple injection . Another measures is the alternate rich/lean adjustment of individual cylinders while adhering to an exhaust gas l of 1. Unburned exhaust gas constituents from the rich burn cylinders are exothermally converted here with O2 from the lean burn cylinders in the threeway catalytic converter.
In contrast a diesel engine, in a gasoline engine operated with exhaust gas l of 1 there is no O2 available for soot oxidation in normal operation. After the required temperature is reached, the soot can therefore be burned off initially in an overrun phase. Alternatively, it is possible to achieve soot burn off by setting a lean exhaust gas l of up to approximately 1.1, which is however to be avoided because of the increased NOx emissions involved. Saturation detection The strategies used to determine the amount of soot stored in the particulate filter are comparable with the method used on diesel engines .
Requirements: The basic requirements regarding components in motor sport vehicles are different from those in production vehicles. A racing car requires maximum performance for a few hours with the lowest possible weight, whereas durability and low costs are the desired attributes in a production car. Furthermore, the components in a racing car are exposed to greater loads from heat, dust, moisture, and vibrations than those in a production car.
The Bosch Motorsport Division develops, produces and sells electronic systems and components for this special field of application. Both modified mass produced parts and pure motor sport developments, which often have no equivalent in series production, are offered.
Components Modified mass produced parts Reducing weight Reducing weight Technicians are constantly on the lookout for ways of reducing the weight of production components for racing applications. The reduced service life generally associated with this is tolerated.
tive to high rotational speeds. Tempera : ture sensors respond much more quickly once the metal that normally encloses the measuring capsule has been removed.
The sometimes significantly higher specific engine performance of racing cars makes these measures absolutely necessary. The use of better ferromagnetic materials generate higher magnetic forces in the coils of the fuel injectors. This makes possible greater needle strokes, which in turn permit a higher fuel flow. The modifications to ignition coils go even further. Here only the original shell remains the same, the technology inside is all new. The coils are made with fewer windings from thicker wire, the coil cores are made of higher quality material. The higher spark energy required for direction injection highly supercharged racing engines can be guaranteed in this way. The shorter dwell periods increase the upper speed limit to 15,000 rpm.
Replacing connectors Replacing connectors Production connectors made of plastic are not designed for frequent opening and closing and have only limited resistance to vibrations and moisture. They are therefore often removed from motor sport components and replaced by cables with motor sport connectors . Their metal housings have a bayonet catch for reliable and rapid opening and closing. They are dust proof and watertight and, because they are no longer rigidly connected to the component, can be installed in locations that are less exposed to vibration. Particularly for sensors, ignition coils and fuel injectors this modification makes installation and removal easier and increases operational reliability by minimizing primarily vibration induced damage. These connectors are standard in motor racing and are compatible with virtually all wiring harnesses and diagnostic tools. Dissipating heat Dissipating heat High performance electronic systems generate a lot of heat which can jeopardize temperature sensitive components. This heat is dissipated by cooling fins to the housing walls and the use of thermal conduction paste in the housings. These housings are often black to improve heat dissipation.
ECUs: The fundamental difference from a production ECU, where the manufacturer must guarantee tuning protection measures, is the free access to the software for all motor sport systems. In this way, the teams can tune each car individually to racetrack, weather and driver. The computer programs required for tuning on the laptop computer are developed by Bosch itself. Furthermore, programs for analyzing recorded vehicle data and for simulating different vehicle tunings are offered. Series based ECUs Series based developments with sheetmetal housings and plastic connectors constitute the entry level into motor sport ECUs. The range of functions is less complex than in high end ECUs and can therefore also be easily handled by smaller teams. These systems are frequently used in Formula 3, in marque cups and in near series motor racing classes, where many GT3 class customer sports cars are used.
High end ECUs Top end models among the ECUs have all aluminum milled housings and motor sport connectors . The housings are powder coated to protect the surface. The number of connector pins and hence of inputs and outputs is high, and the number of controllable cylinders is frequently high too. Some systems have customer code areas, in which customers can store their own software and link with the basic software. Communication channels to CAN and LIN bus systems as well as telemetry connections and internal data memories are standard.
Working with these systems calls for a high level of specialized knowledge, which as a rule can only be brought to bear by works teams. Typical areas of application for these ECUs are the World Rally Championship .
Pure motor sport developments As well as the high end ECUs, further pure motor sport developments are featured in the Bosch Motorsport portfolio. These include, for example, lap trigger systems with which the times of complete laps or lap segments are measured and telemetry systems for data transfer from the racing car to the box. Driver displays replace all the instruments in the dashboard, are freely programmable, and have switchable display pages. They are frequently equipped with data memories. High pressure fuel injection systems and their valve injectors often require a significantly higher operating voltage than the conventional vehicle electrical system can provide. This gap is filled by the power supply unit which is used in many Formula 1 cars and delivers voltages of up to 90 V. Safety and comfort Electronic systems from Bosch however not only deliver better acceleration, but also better deceleration and increased safety and comfort in racing cars.
A radar based accident avoidance system uses visual signals to warn against passing cars; these systems are particularly helpful when it is raining or at night. The Bosch Power Box replaces all the relays and fuses in a racing car and enables the relay switching points to be changed on a laptop computer without a mechanic having to undo a screw or exchange a component. The laptop computer here also replaces the tool box. In the case of systematic troubleshooting it is very helpful to be able to measure specifically the signal flow of individual cables in the wiring harness. Here a specifically developed breakout panel, which is switched between the wiring harness and the ECU, provides sterling service. Customer specific extra small series Bosch hand makes in small numbers motor sport wiring harnesses which network the systems in a racing car with each other. They have the customary motor sport connectors and are delivered to the customer after exhaustive functional tests.
Motor sport spark plugs only have the basic idea in common with the mass produced components. Electrodes made of pure platinum permit operation at significantly higher temperatures. Thread diameters reduced to 8 mm allow the engine developers plenty of freedom in fashioning the combustion chambers and the cooling ducts . Thread length, width across flats and other sizes are designed by arrangement with the customer. This results in hand made sample spark plugs which are specially customized to the existing engine concept.
As well as the ready to install spark plugs, Bosch offers its motor racing customers the separate ceramic core of the spark plug for subsequent processing. The customer provides this "strippedback spark plug" with their own shell, the design of which is among the best kept secrets of the design engineers.
New directions Mirroring developments in production vehicle manufacturing, hybrid systems are increasingly being used in racing cars. Electric motors work in coordination with gasoline or diesel engines; recovered energy is buffered in electrical or mechanical accumulators.
Some motor racing classes are already fully reliant on the purely electric drivetrain, as is demonstrated for example by Formula E cars, which race on city center street circuits around the world.
1 Activated charcoal canister, 2 Canister purge valve, 3 Gasoline rail with gasoline injectors,  4 Camshaft adjuster, 5 Ignition coil with spark plug, 6 Camshaft sensor,  7 l sensor upstream of primary catalytic converter, 8 Hot film air mass meter,  9 Electronically actuated throttle valve , 26 Electromagnetic shutoff valve, 27 LPG filler neck, 28 80 % filler stop valve, 29 LPG level indicator, 30 Pressure relief valve, 31 l sensor downstream of primary catalytic converter, 32 Main catalytic converter.
UMK2122 4Y 13 14 15 16 17 19 18 22 1 2 4 5 6 7 20 8 9 10 23 24 21   3 31 32 11 25 26 29 28 30 27 12
vember 2016), there is estimated to be a : population of more than 26 million LPGfueled vehicles worldwide ).
The additional volumetric consumption of LPG fueled vehicles is, depending on engine concept, engine management and gas system 20 30 %, compared with gasoline fueled vehicles. In spite of this additional costs, the running costs of LPG vehicles are cheaper than those of gasoline and diesel vehicles.
LPG systems are distinguished by their mixture formation with gaseous injection or liquid LPG injection and by the ECU concepts with one common or two separate engine ECUs .
Systems with venturi mixers can only still be used in older vehicles or in markets with laxer exhaust emission regulations.
Vehicles with spark ignition engines are virtually exclusively converted to bifuel LPG/gasoline operation. Most LPG systems are installed as a retrofit. In the  meantime, however, vehicle manufacturers are also offering models with bifuel  LPG/gasoline operation off the assembly line. In these vehicles, the LPG tank as in the retrofit concepts is installed for the most concepts in the spare wheel  compartment. The luggage compartment load volume remains unchanged with this form of in stallation. The spare wheel is simply omitted and replaced by a blow out repair kit .
depending on the propane to butane mixture ratio. It is stored in a liquid state in steel tanks. The filling system of the LPG tanks incorporates a fill volume restrictor which ensures that the fill volume does not exceed 80 % of the liquid phase of the maximum tank volume. This ensures that the internal tank pressure does not rise to unacceptable levels when the tank is subjected to heat. The tanks are subject , and optionally a thermal safety valve which  allows the gas to escape under controlled conditions in the event of a fire.
Fuel delivery The LPG is delivered from the tank to the engine in systems with gaseous injection by the internal tank pressure . Because this pressure drops as ambient temperature decreases, the operation of such systems is partly limited with regard to their suitability for winter operation.
In systems with liquid injection, the LPG is delivered by an LPG fuel supply pump installed in the LPG tank which generates a delivery pressure in addition to the internal tank pressure. In terms of their suitability for winter operation, these systems are comparable with gasoline injection systems.
into the intake manifold 1 Activated charcoal canister, 2 Canister purge valve, 3 Gasoline rail with gasoline injectors,  4 Camshaft adjuster, 5 Ignition coil with spark plug, 6 Camshaft sensor,  7 l sensor upstream of primary catalytic converter, 8 Hot film air mass meter,  9 Electronically actuated throttle valve , 10 Intake manifold pressure sensor, 11 LPG ECU, 12 Engine ECU, 13 Accelerator pedal module, 14 LPG shutoff valves for supply and return, 15 Combined pressure and temperature sensor, 16 LPG fuel rail with gas injectors, 17 Engine temperature sensor, 18 Primary catalytic converter, 19 Crankshaft speed sensor, 20 Knock sensor, 21 Gasoline tank with integrated electric fuel pump, 22 Gasoline filler neck, 23 LPG tank with integrated electric LPG pump, 24 Electromagnetic shutoff valve, 25 LPG filler neck, 26 80 % filler stop valve with integrated LPG level sensor, 27 Pressure relief valve, 28 Non return valve, 29 l sensor downstream of primary catalytic converter, 30 Main catalytic converter. 13 14 15 16 17 20 1 2 4 5 6 7 18 8 9 10 21 22 19 3 29 30 11 12 14 23 25 26 28 24 27 UMK2123 3Y
LPG systems : Systems with gaseous LPG injection Operating principle Operating principle The LPG is delivered in liquid state from the tank via the electromagnetic shutoff valve to the engine compartment , where an additional shutoff valve is installed. After this, the LPG is converted into the gaseous state with pressures of 0.5 to 3.5 bar in the evaporator and the pressure regulator. The evaporator is heated by the engine coolant in order to compensate for the cooling encountered during the phase transition. The gaseous LPG is directed from the evaporator through a pressureresistant flexible hose to the LPG rail and from here injected by the gas injectors into the intake manifold.
The air intake section of the basic engine remains unchanged except for the connection of the LPG gas injectors to the intake manifold.
Mixture formation Mixture formation Mixture formation is effected in the same manner as conventional multipoint gasoline injection. The LPG rail supplies the individual gas injectors with gaseous LPG.  Engine management determines the required injected fuel quantity, which is corrected by means of l control. The injected fuel quantity is additionally corrected by means of the pressure and the temperature of the fuel in the LPG rail.
LPG injection displaces some of the  inducted air volume in the intake manifold, which results in charge losses in nonturbocharged engines. Engine performance reduced by a factor of 2 4 % compared with gasoline operation can thus be expected for LPG operation.
Systems with LPG liquid injection  into the intake manifold Operating principle Operating principle In systems with LPG liquid injection into the intake manifold the LPG ECU regulates the system pressure via a fuel pump installed in the LPG tank.
Some systems may also need a pressure regulator to regulate the injection pressure. Because of the tendency for vapor bubbles to form in the fuel system, systems with LPG liquid injection must be fitted with a tank return line in order if necessary to expel vapor bubbles that occur.
Mixture formation Mixture formation As with conventional multipoint gasoline injection, the LPG is injected into the intake manifold in front of the engine intake valves. The evaporation that occurs as the LPG is injected lowers the temperature of the inducted air/gas mixture, which has a positive impact on the engine's volumetric efficiency and performance figures.
thanks to the cooling effect in the intake manifold and combustion chamber, thus producing identical engine performance figures to gasoline without further  measures. Engines with LPG liquid injection can even deliver slightly higher  performance figures when compared with gasoline operation.
LPG direct liquid injection into the com : bustion chamber is possible in all modern gasoline engines with direct injection. Such systems are currently still in the development phase .
Exhaust emissions With regard to the limited pollutant components HC, CO and NOx, the use of LPG as fuel in modern spark ignition engines offers some advantages over gasoline  operation. The situation when it comes to CO2 emissions is even better. Here, LPG vehicles can achieve a reduction of approximately 10 %. This reduction is founded on the lower carbon content in LPG.
Furthermore, when compared with diesel engines, there are virtually no particulates. LPG drives also have advantages when it comes to other exhaust gas components which are not limited by law but which are harmful to health. Thus, for instance, LPG drives emit significantly lower amounts of aromatic hydrocarbons , engines fueled by LPG are not subject to any particular demands on the exhaust gas treatment system of the existing gasoline concept. The essential exhaust gas components of LPG operation are comparable with those of gasoline operation.
Engine management for LPG systems Both double ECU concepts are used. Because the  vehicles are bifuel, the driver can select  between gasoline and LPG operation using a switch.
The level sensor installed in the LPG tank signals the current LPG tank level to the engine management system. A combined low pressure and temperature  sensor mounted on the gas rail enables the engine management system to correct the injection timing in such a way that a stoichiometric mixture can be pilot controlled in the intake manifold even if the gas density fluctuates. The engine management systems uses the values from the l sensor and different adaptation algorithms to adapt the mixture formation for different gas qualities. Even functions for switching between gas and gasoline  operation are integrated.
Systems with LPG liquid injection into the combustion chamber require, in addition to the functions for mixture formation and gas quality adaptation, functions for controlling the LPG fuel pump.
LPG injector 1 Electrical connection, 2 Field winding, 3 O rings, 4 Valve housing, 5 Filter strainer, 6 LPG supply, 7 Armature, 8 O rings, 9 Valve body, 10 Valve needle, 11 Injection nozzle.
Design and operating principle Design and operating principle Essentially, the design and function of a gas injector configured for operation with gaseous LPG are very similar to those of a CNG injector .
LPG liquid injector Function and requirements Function and requirements In systems where the LPG is injected in the liquid state of aggregation the LPG must be kept in the liquid state in the entire pipe and rail system by means of pressure build up by a pump installed in the LPG tank. Only in this state can it be injected.
nate vapor bubbles that occur .
Design and operating principle Design and operating principle LPG injectors are, in response to the above mentioned requirements, designed according to the bottom feed principle. The injector is designed in such a way that the fitting for the fuel inlet into the injector housing is as close as possible to the injector outlet. This layout enables the valve to be easily flushed with fresh fuel in order to quickly remove possible vapor bubbles.
The fuel injectors normally used in gasoline engines, on the other hand, operate for the most part according to the top feed principle. Because of the supply of fresh fuel located at the top end of the injector housing, the flush process for the purpose of removing vapor bubbles in the injector would be very diffecult or not possible at all. Under such conditions it would not be possible to provide a correct metering of the fuel quantity and thus optimum combustion, which is why the top feed principle is not suitable for use in liquid LPG injection.
Installation position Installation position The position of the LPG injectors in the intake manifold is subject to special design requirements according to the generation of cold by the evaporation of the LPG during the injection process , which can be put down among other things to the formation of ice crystals.
The Euronozzle is supposed to replace all the other necks on a Europewide basis in future. The EU Regulation for this  standardized neck has not yet been adopted by the majority of EU member states. Design Design Each filler neck in the vehicle is designed in such a way that the LPG vehicle can be refueled at all LPG filling stations by using a suitable adapter.
Evaporator for systems  with gaseous LPG injection Function Function Evaporators are used in systems with gaseous LPG injection. The LPG is delivered to the evaporator by the vapor pressure in the gas tank via an electromagnetic shutoff valve.
with pressure regulator 1 Solenoid coil of electromagnetic  shutoff valve, 2 Seal, 3 Inlet for liquid LPG and filter, 4 Inlet for engine coolant, 5 Outlet for engine coolant, 6 Temperature sensor, 7 Outlet for gaseous LPG  at constant pressure,  8 Safety pressure relief valve, 9 Evaporation chamber, 10 Area for gaseous LPG, 11 Connection for intake manifold vacuum, 12 Pressure diaphragm with mounting, 13 Control rod, 14 Adjusting screw, 15 Spring, 16 Control plunger and throttling orifice. 2 3 1 6 5 4 12 13 10 14 16 15 8 7 9 11 UMK2138 1Y
Operating principle: Operating principle The LPG enters through the inlet connection into the evaporation area. This consists of a labyrinth that is heated by the vehicle's heating circuit to convert the incoming liquid gas into the gaseous state. Pressure of 4 to 15 bar are achieved here. The pressure varies depending on the temperature of the engine coolant and the composition of the LPG . The now gaseous medium passes through a transfer passage into the pressure regulation area, which is closed by a diaphragm. A pre tensioned spring is seated on the back of the diaphragm. The pre tension can be adjusted with an adjusting screw in order to effect deviations from the factory output pressure pre setting.
The diaphragm is connected via a lever mechanism to a valve on the transferpassage connection. When the pressure increases, the movement of the diaphragm actuates a control rod, which in turn alters the opening cross section at the outlet of the pressure regulation area. Thus the  supply is reduced or closed off and no more gas can flow. When the gas pressure decreases in response to increased fuel reduction by the engine, the diaphragm is moved in the opposite direction. The valve is opened via the lever mechanism to allow gas to flow until again an equilibrium of forces acts on the diaphragm and the lever mechanism can close the transfer passage again.
An important characteristic of the quality of the evaporator is the lowest possible fluctuation of the operating pressure in  different engine operating states together with the highest possible control precision over the operating time.
In certain countries, owing to contaminants in the LPG, the manufacturer recommends that the diaphragm be replaced after a certain operating time.
Intake manifold vacuum support Intake manifold vacuum support In addition, the response of evaporator pressure regulation is optimized by connecting the intake manifold pressure to the area above the diaphragm.
Operating values Operating values The inlet pressure is 4 to 15 bar, depending on ambient temperature and gas quality. The output pressure is 0.5 to 3.5 bar, depending on the setting.
Electromagnetic shutoff valve and temperature sensor The electromagnetic shutoff valve interrupts the gas supply when the engine is not in gas mode. The changeover from gasoline to LPG operation is initiated by the engine ECU as a function of the  engine coolant temperature. The minimum coolant temperature value for changeover is selected to ensure reliable evaporation of the LPG in the evaporator. A temperature sensor is integrated in the evaporator coolant circuit for this purpose. A cold start in gas mode is not possible with these systems.
II. Approval of a vehicle fitted with  specific equipment for the use of LPG in its propulsion system with regard to the installation of such equipment. K. Reif: Ottomotor Management, 4th Ed., Verlag Springer Vieweg, 2015.
Applications: In view of the worldwide efforts to reduce CO2 emissions .
Emissions Compared to gasoline, the combustion of CNG produces approximately 25 % less CO2. CNG thus generates the lowest local CO2 emissions of the fossil fuels. Because of the lower CO2 emissions, the petroleum tax on CNG is reduced in many countries. Use of biogas Using biogas . Natural gas vehicles Various vehicle manufacturers have in the meantime started to offer natural gas versions of automobile models from the factory. This ensures that the larger CNG tanks are accommodated more efficiently and conveniently, thereby preventing as is practically inevitable when these tanks are installed subsequently the loss of luggage compartment volume.
The latest information on natural gas  vehicles and the filling station network in Germany and Europe can be found at the Internet addresses . Naturalgas vehicles are, for the most part, bifuel  vehicles which allow the driver to switch between natural gas and gasoline operation. There are variants in the form of  monovalent vehicles and the concepts referred to as "Monovalent plus", in which the engine is optimized for natural gas operation so as to be able to utilize to  optimum effect all the favorable properties of natural gas .
"Monovalent plus" vehicles still feature a small gasoline tank so that they can continue to be driven in gasoline mode in the event of there being no natural gas filling station nearby.
Storage of natural gas Natural gas can be stored in compressed form at a pressure of 200 bar as CNG . In view of the great expense involved in storing the gas in liquid form, storing the gas in compressed form at 200 bar has become the standard method. In spite of being stored at high pressure, natural gas has a lower energy storage density than gasoline such that a tank with four times the volume is required for the same energy content.
Figure 1: Spark ignition engine with natural gas or gasoline operation: 1 Carbon canister, 2 Canister purge valve, 3 Exhaust gas recirculation valve,  4 Camshaft adjuster, 5 Hot film air mass meter,  6 Electronically actuated throttle valve ,  7 Intake manifold pressure sensor, 8 Gasoline rail with gasoline injectors, 9 Ignition coil with spark plug, 10 Camshaft sensor, 11 l sensor before catalytic converter, 12 Bifuel Motronic ECU, 13 Accelerator pedal module, 14 Natural gas pressure control module with integrated gas shutoff valve and high pressure sensor, 15 Gas rail with natural gas pressure and temperature sensor, 16 Natural gas injector, 17 Crankshaft speed sensor, 18 Engine temperature sensor, 19 Knock sensor, 20 Primary catalytic converter, 21 CAN interface, 22 Engine warning light, 23 Diagnosis interface, 24 Interface to immobilizer ECU, 25 Gasoline tank with integrated electric fuel pump, 26 Gasoline filler neck, 27 Natural gas filler neck, 28 High pressure shutoff valve on natural gas tank,  29 Natural gas tank, 30 Main catalytic converter,  31 l sensor after primary catalytic converter.  12 13 14 15 16 18 19 1 2 3 8 4 9 10 11 20 5 6 7 21 22 23 24 25 26 28 29  17 CAN 31 30 27 UMK1913 2Y
Operating principle The air drawn in by the engine is routed via the air mass meter and the electronically actuated throttle valve to the intake manifold. From there, it enters the combustion chamber through the intake valves . It then flows through a flexible low pressure line into a common gas rail that supplies the naturalgas injectors.
Engine management  for natural gas vehicles Both double ECU concepts are used. In some  bifuel vehicles, the driver can use a switch to select between gas and gasoline operation. In most models, the switchover  occurs automatically and the vehicle is driven in natural gas mode until the tank contents are used up. Then the vehicle is switched over automatically to gaso line mode.
The high temperature sensor mounted on the pressure control module supplies the engine management system with  information on the current fill level of the natural gas tank and also facilitates leakage diagnostics. The combined natural gas low pressure and temperature sensor fitted on the gas rail enables the engine management system to correct the valve injection timing in such a way that a stoichiometric mixture can be pilotcontrolled in the intake manifold even if the gas density fluctuates. The enginemanagement system uses an adaptation algorithm to adapt to changing gas qualities.
The other sensors and actuators of the engine management system are mostly identical to those in a gasoline engine. Mixture formation Virtually exclusively bifuel and "Monovalent plus" vehicles are available today. These vehicles can operate both on natural gas and on gasoline. Either manifold injection or gasoline direct injection may be used to inject the gasoline.
Natural gas manifold injection Natural gas manifold injection In most natural gas engines, the gas is injected, as with gasoline injection, into the intake manifold. The low pressure gas rail supplies the injectors, which inject natural gas at intermittent intervals into the intake manifold. Mixture formation is improved in comparison with gasoline injection, as natural gas, because of the completely gaseous supply of fuel, does not condense on the intake manifold walls and does not deposit a film there. This has a positive effect on emissions, particularly during the warm up phase.
Non supercharged engines that are  fueled by natural gas generally have a 10 to 15 % lower output. This is due to the lower volumetric efficiency attributed to displacement of the inducted air caused by the injected natural gas. The vehicle engines can however be optimized specially for natural gas as the fuel. The extremely high knock resistance of natural gas , efficiency increases due to additional  dethrottling and reduced friction.
Natural gas direct injection: Natural gas direct injection Natural gas can also be injected directly into the combustion chamber. In this way, the volumetric efficiency losses can be completely avoided and in turbocharged engines the supercharging efficiency, especially at low speeds, can be improved by scavenging. Scavenging involves engine operation with extended overlapping of the intakeand exhaustvalve opening times. The drawbacks of natural gas direct injection are the greater complexity of the injectors and the fact that, due to the necessary higher natural gas injection pressure dictated by the concept, the tank cannot be drained as far as in engines with natural gas manifold injection.
Exhaust emissions Compared with gasoline engines, natural gas vehicles are characterized by approximately 25 % lower CO2 emissions. The reason for this is the better hydrogen/ carbon ratio . This results in the creation of more water and less CO2 during combustion.
Apart from the virtually particulate free combustion, in conjunction with a threeway closed loop catalytic converter, only very low levels of the pollutants NOx, CO and HC are produced. As a rule, the catalytic converter has a higher preciousmetal load than is the case in gasoline engines, enabling it to better convert the HC emissions in the exhaust gas that mainly consist of chemically stable methane and to counteract the higher "light off temperature" for natural gas. Methane is, however, classified as nontoxic.
Natural gas vehicles comply with the current exhaust emission limits, while trucks and natural gas buses also comply with the EEV limits . The natural gas engine offers distinct advantages over gasoline and diesel engines, also in particular with regard to the non limited pollutant emissions.
Components Natural gas injector  for manifold injection Function Function In order to supply the internal combustion engine with gaseous fuel, it is necessary to meter through the natural gas injectors a much greater volume of gas than gasoline in a conventional gasoline engine. This requirement places specific demands on the design of the natural gas injector, which must be adapted to the greater gas volume in its cross sections. Even the high flow velocities that are  encountered call for a special form of flow routing in order to reduce pressure losses in the injector.
1 Pneumatic port, 2 Sealing ring,  3 Valve housing, 4 Filter strainer,  5 Electrical connection, 6 Sleeve,  7 Solenoid coil, 8 Valve spring,  9 Solenoid armature with elastomer seal, 10 Valve seat.
sure on the mass flow, it is necessary for : the pressure ahead of the nozzle at the narrowest cross section has proven to be advantageous.
Design and operating principle Design and operating principle The solenoid armature . When the coil is at zero current, the valve spring holds the injector closed. Flow optimized geometry Flow optimized geometry Thanks to design measures in the routing of the flow, the pressure loss is minimized ahead of the throttling point in order to ensure the greatest possible mass flow. Furthermore, the narrowest cross section and thus the throttling point is located at the discharge end after the seal. The speed of sound prevails here such that the valve represents approximately an ideal nozzle in physical terms.
Sealing geometry Sealing geometry The natural gas injector is fitted with an elastomer seal and is similar in terms of its seal seat geometry to shutoff valves for pneumatic applications. The elastomer increases the tightness of the seal against metallic needle valves.
Damping in the elastomer also prevents "rebounding", i. e. a repeated, unwanted opening of the solenoid armature during the closing operation, and thus increases metering precision.
Pressure control module Function Function The function of the pressure control module is to reduce the pressure of the natural gas from tank pressure . There are also systems which operate at pressures starting from 2 bar ranging up to 11 bar. Design Design Mechanical version: Today, mainly mechanical diaphragm or plunger type pressure regulators are used. Pressure reduction is effected by means of throttle action and can occur either in one single stage or in several stages.
1 Solenoid coil of electromagnetic gas shutoff valve,  2 Seal,  3 High pressure inlet with sinter filter, 4 High pressure sensor,  5 Low pressure outlet, 6 Safety pressure relief valve, 7 Low pressure chamber, 8 Pressure diaphragm with mounting, 9 Control rod,  10 Adjusting screw, 11 Spring, 12 Control plunger and throttling orifice. UMK2072 2Y
Figure 3 shows the sectional view of a : single stage diaphragm type pressure regulator. A sinter filter , a gas shutoff valve, and a high pressure sensor are integrated into the pressure control module on the high pressure side. The sinter filter is designed to retain solid particulates in the gas flow. The gas shutoff valve enables the gas flow to be interrupted, for example when the vehicle is stopped. The high pressure sensor is used to determine the natural gas supply in the tank and for diagnostics.
A pressure relief valve is mounted on the pressure regulator on the low pressure side. In the event of a fault in the pressure regulator, this valve prevents damage to components in the low pressure system.
In normal control operation, the gas cools down very dramatically as it expands as a result of the Joule Thompson effect. In order to prevent freezing, the pressure control module has an integrated heater, which is connected to the vehicle's heating circuit .
The controlled operating pressure is dependent on the diaphragm size and the initial spring tension. To adjust the pressure level, the initial spring tension is set and sealed by means of an adjusting screw in the factory.
Electromechanical version: As well as purely mechanical pressurecontrol modules there are also electromechanical versions. These typically consist of an initial mechanical pressure control stage, which reduces the tank pressure to a mean pressure of approximately 20 bar. In a second stage the pressure is further reduced by an electromagnetically actuated control valve to the operated pressure specified by the engine management system, and electronically regulated. The advantages of electromechanical pressure regulators are the increased pressure control precision and the variability of the control pressure. In this way, the injection pressure can be decreased and thus the metering precision of the natural gas injectors increased in engine low load phases, e. g. at idle.
Operating principle  Operating principle  of mechanical pressure control module of mechanical pressure control module The gas flows from the high pressure side through a variable throttling orifice into the low pressure chamber, where the diaphragm is situated. The diaphragm controls the opening cross section of the throttle via a control rod. When the pressure in the low pressure chamber is low, the diaphragm is forced by the spring in the direction of the throttling orifice, which opens to allow the pressure to increase on the low pressure side. In the event of excessive pressure in the low pressure chamber, the spring is compressed more sharply and the throttling orifice closes. The decreasing cross section of the throttling orifice reduces the pressure on the low pressure side. In stationary operation, the throttling cross section required for the operating pressure is set, while the pressure in the low pressure chamber  remains extensively constant.
Minimal operating pressure fluctuations in the event of load changes testify to the quality of the pressure regulator. ________________________________ References References www.erdgas.info/erdgas mobil/.
Applications: Motivation Ever shrinking fossil fuel resources and the heightened demand for reduced carbon dioxide emissions necessitate a rethink of tried and tested drive concepts. Rising crude oil prices make alternative energies increasingly economical and there is the increasing public perception that sustained mobility also requires a sustained energy basis.
1 Carbon canister, 2 Tank vent valve, 3 Ethanol sensor , 10 Intake manifold pressure sensor, 11 Swirl control valve, 12 Fuel rail, 13 High pressure sensor, 14 High pressure injector, 15 l sensor, 16 Knock sensor, 17 Engine temperature sensor, 18 Primary catalytic converter, 19 l sensor, 20 Engine ECU, 21 Exhaust gas recirculation valve, 22 Engine speed sensor, 23 Main catalytic converter, 24 CAN interface,  25 Malfunction indicator lamp, 26 Diagnosis interface, 27 Interface to immobilizer,  28 Accelerator pedal module, 29 Fuel supply module with low pressure pump. 1 2 3 4 5 8 9 10      12      11      19 22 23 21        20        28 29 27 24 25 26 CAN 7 6 13      16      15      17     18      14      UMK2346Y
a gasoline engine for flex fuel operation. It is to a large extent the same as a conventional gasoline engine with gasoline direct injection.
Ethanol as an alternative fuel Sustainability The potential to reduce CO2 emissions is established in part by the more favorable ratio of carbon to hydrogen content of alcohol fuels, but primarily by the positive CO2 balance in the course of extraction from renewable raw materials. It is however important here to consider the source of the produced alcohol fuel. Thus, for example, the extraction of methanol from coal has an extremely poor CO2 balance, whereas the extraction of ethanol from parts of plants has a positive balance.
Markets for flex fuel vehicles Today, the admixture of methanol in appreciable quantities plays, on account of local factors, a role only in China. Moreover, methanol, because it is toxic and harmful to health, must be viewed as highly critical. In the following, flex fuel operation refers to operation with ethanol fuels.
Fuel E 0...E 5 E 10 E 24 E 85 E 100 Maximum ethanol content 5 % 10 % 24 % 85 % 93 % Maximum water content < 1 % < 1 % 1 % 1 % 7 % Minimum gasoline content 95 % 90 % 76 % 15 % 0 % Relative energy content referred to gasoline 100 % 97 % 91 % 70 % 61 % Regional distribution Europe USA, EU Brazil USA,  Sweden, partly EU Brazil
Flex fuel refers to mixtures of gasoline : and ethanol in any variable ratio. Today, a distinction is drawn primarily between two mixture ranges of ethanol mixtures in the flex fuel sector: Mixtures with mixture ratios between pure gasoline and E 85 , but in real terms in the field contains 10 to 15 % water. Also associated with this increased water content is increased conductivity and the increased presence of salts. This is the reason why there are two separate variants of a component for the E 85 and E 100 application cases and also specific adaptations are made in the electronic engine management. It is important here than an E 85 system is not suitable for E 100.
Essentially, flex fuel systems are implemented with manifold and direct injection. In the case of direct injection it is possible in particular to use the high knock resistance of ethanol to good effect, which is advantageous with regard to the full load quantity demand due to less fuel enrichment.
Important factors are the lower energy density , which results in dramatically increased fuel system delivery and injected fuel quantities. Critical to the starting response at very low temperatures are the high boiling temperature of 78 degC and the high heat of evaporation compared with the low boiling fractions of gasoline. However, for operation at high engine temperatures and at the knock limit, advantageous effects are also to be expected due to the high heat of evaporation and better knock resistance.
These mentioned properties of ethanol and their effects make it necessary to adapt the internal combustion engine itself, but also the engine management system and its components accordingly. It is also important that the ethanol fuels not be present as pure fuels with a fixed ethanol content in the fuel tank, but that the mixing of different ethanol fuels lead to any mixture ratios. The mixtures can moreover also be supplied by regionally and seasonally deviating ethanol admixtures by the filling stations and in the USA by "blender pumps" in the system. Thus, a reliable and accurate "onboard recognition" of the current ethanol content is required.
The higher corrosivity of ethanol must be taken into account for the components installed in a system. To achieve evaporation limit values the higher permeation tendency of ethanol molecules through pipe and component materials plays a significant role.
Flex fuel concepts : for the markets Vehicle manufacturers pursue different engine concepts and marketing strategies for the regions. With regard to the degree of adaptation of the systems there are therefore different aspects which conform to the aimed for strategy.
Markets USA market USA market In the US market as a matter of priority only those adaptations which are necessary to be able to offer the vehicles as flexfuel vehicles are carried out. This involves the fundamental compatibility for flex fuel without specifically exploiting the advantageous ethanol properties. In real vehicle operation it is used only occasionally with higher and variable ethanol contents.
European market European market In contrast, a different concept is pursued in Europe whereby both the increased efficiency of the engine and the enhanced performance in E 85 operation are exploited as advantages, and are emphasized in the marketing of the vehicle. Brazilian market Brazilian market Only in Brazil is it possible up to now to observe the last logically consistent step where the engine manufacturers also increase the compression ratios of the engines since in this market the fuels offered already generally contain at least 24 % ethanol and consequently a higher octane number is obtained.
System Subsystem Crankshaft Communication CO Link to engine/vehicle Data transfer Key Monitoring Ethanol specific parameters MO Diagnostic System DS CE TS Torque Structure Ethanol specific calorific value and ethanol specific efficiency Torque model Coordination Engine Ignition System Ethanol specific ignition angle and knock adaptation lS TD Torque Demand FS Fuel System Fuel delivery, pilot control, adaptation, injection timing, tank ventilation AS Air System Filling detection Charge adjustment ES Exhaust System OD Operating Data Gasoline engine SMK2345 1E
ethanol properties Properties of ethanol Disadvantageous consequences Higher enthalpy  of evaporation Increased requirements imposed on cold start below 10 degC, larger wall film in cold operation Higher stoichiometric consumption Greater required injected fuel quantities, longer injection periods, repercussions for the combustion process, greater fuel impingement in the engine oil during cold start Changed H/C ratio More water impingement, later dew point end of l sensor
Increased requirements with regard to greater flow rates must be taken into account for specific components. This is particularly important in relation to the fuel injectors since the maximum flow rate is necessary for the increased demand in ethanol operation, but still the minimum metering quantity occurs in gasoline operation. This adaptation is effected by the selection of a greater flow rate from the range of variants. The unchanged minimum quantity is implemented by a shortened activation duration.
components Component Adaptation Fuel supply module Fuel pump for E 85 or E 100, insulated electrical connections, Fuel level sensor ethanol resistant Pressure regulator Ethanol resistant version Fuel rail Ethanol resistant version Intake manifold  fuel injector Extended metering range High pressure injector Stainless steel versions, adapted metering range High pressure pump Stainless steel versions, adapted metering range
Description of the engine : management system The diesel combustion process requires on principle an injection of fuel into the combustion chamber. Modern diesel engines operate with direct injection; the cylinders have a common high pressure pump and a high pressure accumulator constantly under high pressure .
UMK1988 7E Accelerator pedal sensor Sensors and setpoint generators Actuators Air mass sensor Charge air pressure sensor Rail pressure sensor Speed sensors: crankshaft, camshaft Temperature sensors: outside air, intake air, coolant, oil, fuel, urea water solution, particulate filter, SCR catalytic converter Brake switch Clutch switch Glow control unit Injectors Boost pressure actuator Exhaust gas recirculation valve Metering unit SCR pumps SCR valves Thermostat HCI metering and valves Throttle valve actuator Diagnosis lamp A/C compressor Auxiliary heater Fan Intake port shutoff Electric fuel pump Heater l sensor Exhaust gas flap Starter Rail pressure control valve Handbrake switch Ignition/starting switch Vehicle speed controller Diagnostics CAN LIN Differential pressure Particulate filter  l sensor  NOx sensor  Particulate sensor Warning lamps  Flash EPROM EEPROM ECU RAM Monitoring module Terminal 15 Terminal 50
Requirements: The primary and obvious purpose of the engine management system is to deliver the desired power , exhaust gas emissions, power development and driving comfort, and diagnosing the status of the ECU, the sensors, and the actuators. Furthermore, the engine management system must protect the engine and the drivetrain against unacceptable operating conditions and overloading.
To achieve this, many operating parameters must be acquired with sensors and processed with algorithms these are computing processes that take place according to an established scheme. The results are signal curves for activating the actuators. Electronic Diesel Control . Sometimes the engine control unit in itself is referred to as EDC.
Operating principle and : architecture Modern vehicles have a multitude of .
All influencing variables have an impact on the amount of fuel to be injected and the start of injection. They therefore leave their mark on predefined algorithms with which the corresponding control variables are calculated in the ECU and from them the activation signals for the actuators are generated. In the process no states that lead to a vehicle operating condition that is not wanted by the driver may occur during vehicle operation. This is made possible by a comprehensive monitoring concept which must detect occurring deviations in real time and with regard to possible effect introduce appropriate measures .
a) Architecture with vehicle control computer and exhaust gas treatment ECU, b) Vehicle functions and exhaust gas treatment integrated in the engine control unit.
VCU Vehicle Control Unit  .
SAE1387 2E Transmission ESC ABS Engine control unit Exhaust gas treatment 1 Trailer 2 Drivetrain CAN Vehicle CAN a Vehicle control computer 
Electronic control unit .
Data processing : Operating principle The main function of Electronic Diesel Control . This is the only way to optimize component interaction.
The ECU analyzes the incoming signals from the sensors and limits them to the permissible voltage level. Some input signals are also checked for plausibility. Using these input signals together with stored program maps, the microcontroller in the ECU calculates injection timing and its duration. This information is then converted to a signal characteristic which is aligned to current crankshaft and camshaft positions. The computing program is part of the ECU software, which also comprises further functions. The required degree of accuracy together with the diesel engine's outstanding dynamic response requires high level computing power.
The output signals are applied to output stages, which provide adequate power for the actuators are triggered. Faulty signal characteristics are detected by output stage diagnosis functions for the solenoid valves.
Furthermore, signals are exchanged with other systems in the vehicle via the interfaces. The engine control unit monitors the complete fuel injection system as part of a safety strategy.
the individual engine management functions and then activate the engine in the best possible way.
The definitive sensor for determining the driver command is the accelerator pedal , limitations, etc. are calculated in addition to the driver command torque. The calculations are made depending on the type on the clutch , transmission , or engine torque level. The final result is the command torque at the engine shaft. In conclusion, the requested internal engine torque is obtained by adding the temperatureand speed dependent engine friction torques.
Figure 3: Physically oriented torque structure: main path with generation of torque : and quantity 1 Pressure control valve, 2 Rail pressure sensor, 3 Metering unit, 4 High pressure pump, 5 Crankshaft speed sensor, 6 Boost pressure sensor, 7 EGR valve, 8 VTG turbocharger, 9 Control flap, 10 Air mass meter.
n Rotational speed, QS Start quantity, ti Activation period, T Fuel temperature, M Torque, Q Injected fuel quantity, phi Crankshaft angle. AD Activation period, AGR Exhaust gas recirculation, KST Fuel temperature, LDR Boost  pressure, SB Start of injection, RD Rail pressure. KST correction AD map LDR map EGR map RD control EGR control LDR control RD map SB map Accelerator pedal sensor Ratio in % Rail pressure Boost pressure Exhaust gas recirculation n n Surge damper Injector selection Limitations Driver command Handling map Volume Idle controller External intervention Torque M in Nm T M Injected fuel quantity Q in mm3 QS Engine start Friction torque Ti phi 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 M Q SAE1388E
Examples of important functions : in the EDC Control of injection and  of air mass of air mass The required injected fuel quantity is calculated from the necessary internal torque. The required air quantity which must be made available by the air system, especially by supercharging, is calculated from this injected fuel quantity. Among others different physical operating times must be taken into account in the air and fuel systems. The fuel quantity can be adapted at the next firing cylinder while the air quantity can be determined by the operating times in the exhaust gas turbocharger compressor.
Exhaust gas recirculation is provided to improve emissions; the setpoint pressure of rail pressure control depends on the engine operating point as well as on the desired quantity. In actual fact, very many further cross connections and control operations must be taken into consideration, for example the desired quantity must be limited if the air system is unable to supply the required air quantity quickly enough .
With regard to engine and exhaust emission behavior the accuracy of injected fuel quantity and injection intervals is subject to closely toleranced requirements. Learning functions are increasingly used here. Speed governing Speed governing Idle speed control The purpose of idle speed control is to adjust a defined set speed at idle when the accelerator pedal is not pressed. This set speed can vary depending on the engine's operating condition; thus, for example, a higher idle speed is set for a cold engine than for a hot engine. The idle speed can also be increased for example when the vehicle system voltage is too low, the air conditioner is switched on or the vehicle is rolling. Because the engine is operated at idle relatively frequently in heavy traffic  only then has to compensate the model inaccuracies.
Maximum speed governing The purpose of maximum speed governing so as to prevent jerky speed regulation of the engine when accelerating. This is all the more difficult to achieve the closer together the rated power operating point and the maximum speed are.
Intermediate speed regulation Intermediate speed regulation is used for commercial vehicles with power take offs . When it is activated, the engine is regulated to an intermediate speed.
Cruise control and road speed : Cruise control and road speed  limitation limitation The vehicle speed controller enables the vehicle to drive at a constant speed. It regulates the vehicle's speed to a desired value without the driver having to press the accelerator pedal. This value can be adjusted via an operating lever or via steering wheel buttons. The command torque is increased or decreased until the measured actual speed equals the set desired speed.
Road speed limitation limits the maximum speed to a settable or legally prescribed value, even when the accelerator pedal continues to be pressed. This is an aid to the driver, who consequently cannot unintentionally exceed speed limits. For this purpose road speed limitation limits the driver command torque according to the maximum desired speed.
Smooth running control, Smooth running control, fuel balancing fuel balancing control control Not all the cylinders of an engine generate the same torque for an identical injection time. This can be down to differences in cylinder compression, differences in cylinder friction or differences in the hydraulic injection components. The consequences of these torque differences are irregular engine running and increased engine emissions. The purpose of smooth running control or fuel balancing control is to detect such differences with reference to the resulting speed fluctuations and balance these difference by means of a targeted adaptation of the injected fuel quantity of the cylinder in question. Altitude correction Altitude correction Atmospheric pressure decreases at increasing altitude. Consequently the cylinder charge of combustion air becomes smaller. The injected fuel quantity must therefore be reduced. If the same quantity were to be injected as at high atmospheric pressure, there would be heavy smoke emissions due to the air deficiency. The atmospheric pressure is detected by the ambient pressure sensor in the ECU. In this way the injected fuel quantity can be reduced at high altitudes. The atmospheric pressure also influences boost pressure control and torque limitation.
Shutdown Shutdown The upshot of the operating principle of auto ignition is that a diesel engine can only be brought to a stop by interrupting the fuel supply. With Electronic Diesel Control the engine is shut down via the ECU input "injected fuel quantity zero"  can be achieved through the closing of possible throttle valves or exhaust gas flaps.
Boost pressure control Boost pressure control Boost pressure control of the exhaust gas turbocharger improves the torque characteristic in full load operation and the charge cycle in part load operation. The setpoint value for the boost pressure depends on the rotational speed, the injected fuel quantity, the coolant temperature, the air temperature, and the ambient air pressure. It is compared with the actual value of the boost pressure sensor. In the event of a control deviation the bypass valve or
Fan activation Fan activation The engine control unit activates the engine's fan wheel above a certain engine temperature. The fan wheel continues to be operated for a certain amount of time even after the engine has come to a stop. This after run time depends on the current coolant temperature and the load condition of the last driving cycle.
Exhaust gas recirculation Exhaust gas recirculation Exhaust gas is directed into the engine's intake tract to reduce the NOx emissions. This is done via a duct whose cross section can be varied by an exhaust gas recirculation valve. The EGR valve is activated for example by an electrical controller. It is difficult to measure the recirculated exhaust gas flow due to the high temperature and pollutant content of the exhaust gas. Control is therefore effected indirectly via an air mass meter in the fresh air mass flow. Its measured value is compared in the ECU with the engine's theoretical air requirement. This is determined from various characteristic data . The lower the actual measured fresh air mass compared with the theoretical air requirement, the higher the recirculated exhaust gas content.
Substitute functions Substitute functions If individual input signals fail, the ECU lacks important information for the calculations. In this case activation is effected with the aid of substitute functions. Example 1 The fuel temperature is required to calculate the injected fuel quantity. If the fuel temperature sensor fails, the ECU computes with a substitute value which can be calculated for example using a model from the engine temperature, the ambient temperature, and the tank contents. This must be chosen so as not to give rise to excessive soot formation. This can cause the power to drop in some operating ranges in the event of a faulty fuel temperature sensor.
Example 2 If the camshaft position sensor fails, the ECU uses the signal from the crankshaft speed sensor as a substitute value. Different vehicle manufacturers have different concepts which are used to determine via the crankshaft signal characteristic when cylinder 1 is in the compression cycle. The restart, however, takes a little longer as a consequence of these substitute functions.
The different substitute functions may vary from vehicle manufacturer to vehicle manufacturer. All faults are stored by means of the diagnosis function and can be read out in the workshop.
Data exchange with other systems The engine management system can communicate via bus systems, such as for example the CAN bus and communicated via the bus to other systems.
Application : Function and meaning of application Application often also refers to the integration of a component or a subsystem in a higher level system. Here the generic term application is usually also used for the adaptation of hardware components, while the term calibration is only used for the input of data for the functionalities stored in the ECU.
The application/calibration process of Electronic Diesel Control comprises the matching of different subsystems . In order to optimize these in part opposing objectives, a wealth of characteristic values, program maps, and characteristic curves are calibrated or applied.
The end result is a data record which after extensive testing for series production is stored with write protection in a read only memory . Several 10,000 calibration data are processed in modern engine management systems.
Processing takes place with dedicated tools in the laboratory, on engine and vehicle test benches, on test tracks under real driving conditions and during winter, summer, and altitude trials also under extreme conditions.
The function of the fuel supply system : is to store and filter the required fuel and to make fuel available to the fuelinjection installation at a specific supply pressure under all operating conditions. The fuel return flow is cooled in some applications. The fuel supply system comprises the following essential components . In axial and radial piston distributor pumps and partially in the common rail system, the fuel supply pump is integrated into the high pressure pump.
Essentially, the fuel supply system differs greatly, depending on the fuel injection system used, as the following figures for common rail show.
Fuel supply and delivery The function of the fuel pump in the low pressure stage is to supply the highpressure components with sufficient fuel in every operating state, with a low level of noise, at the required pressure, and over the entire service life of the vehicle. Different types are used, depending on the field of application.
common rail for passenger cars 1 Fuel tank,  2 Preliminary filter,  3 Fuel pump,  4 Fuel filter, 5 Low pressure fuel lines, 6 High pressure pump,  7 High pressure fuel lines,  8 Rail,  9 Injector, 10 Fuel return line, 11 ECU, 12 Pressure control valve.
radial piston fuel injection pump for passenger cars 1 Fuel tank, 2 Preliminary filter, 3 Presupply pump, 4 Fuel filter, 5 Radial piston distributor  injection pump with  integrated fuel pump, 6 High pressure line, 7 Nozzle holder assembly, 8 Control unit.
unit injector system for passenger cars 1 Fuel tank with presupply pump and prefilter, 2 Fuel cooler, 3 Electronic control unit, 4 Fuel filter, 5 Fuel feed line, 6 Fuel return line, 7 Tandem pump  as fuel pump, 8 Fuel temperature  sensor, 9 Sheathed element  glow plug, 10 Injector.
tooth spaces from the suction side to the : pressure side. The line of contact of the gear wheels provides the seal between the suction and pressure sides and prevents fuel from flowing back.
The delivery quantity is roughly proportional to the engine speed. At high rotational speeds, therefore, the quantity is limited by throttle action on the intake side or by an overflow valve on the pressure side, which discharges the feed volume to the inlet inside the pump. This prevents unnecessarily high flows in the vehicle's conduit system.
vehicles, in part for passenger cars). Vane type supply pump The vane type supply pump is mounted on the drive shaft in the distributor injection pump. The impeller is centered on the drive shaft and supported by a Woodruff key. An eccentric ring mounted in bearings in the housing surrounds the impeller.
1 Pressure side,  2 Motor armature,  3 Pump element,  4 Pressure limiter,  5 Suction side,  6 Non return valve.
1 Inner pump chamber,  2 Eccentric ring,  3 Sickle shaped cell,  4 Fuel inlet ,  7 Woodruff key,  8 Drive shaft,  9 Vane, 10 Impeller.
vane and the eccentric ring. The centrifu : gal force generated by the motion of rotation presses the four vanes of the impeller outwards against the eccentric ring. The fuel between the underside of the vanes and the impeller supports this outward movement of the vanes. The rotary motion forces the fuel located between the vanes into the upper kidney shaped recess and through a bore to the outlet. Application: Integrated presupply pump in the distributor injection pump.
Locking vane pump In a locking vane pump , springs press two locking vanes against a rotor. As the rotor turns, the volume is increased on the suction side and fuel is drawn into two chambers. The volume is reduced on the pressure side and fuel is delivered from the two chambers. The locking vane pump delivers fuels at very low speeds.
Tandem fuel pump The tandem fuel pump is an assembly consisting of a fuel pump and a vacuum pump, for example, for the brake booster. From a functional perspective, these are two separate pumps, which, however, are driven by a common drive shaft. It is integrated into the engine cylinder head and driven by the engine camshaft.
1 Return to tank,  2 Supply from tank,  3 Pump element ,  4 Throttling bore,  5 Filter,  6 Suction throttle,  7 Pressure relief valve,  8 Connection for pressure measurement,  9 Supply, injector, 10 Return, injector, 11 Non return valve, 12 Bypass.
Low pressure control valve The pressure control valve is built into the fuel return, for common rail usually into the high pressure pump. It provides an adequate operating pressure in the low pressure stage of the injection systems under all operating conditions and ensures that the pumps are filled uniformly.
For example, the accumulator plunger of the valve for the unit injector and unit pump opens at the initial opening pressure of 300 to 350 kPa . A compression spring compensates for minor pressure variations in accumulator volume. At an opening pressure of 4 to 4.5 bar, an edge seal opens and produces a noticeable increase in flow rate. There are two screws with different spring force settings for presetting the opening pressure.
Fuel cooler The high pressure in the injector of the unit injector system for passenger cars and some common rail systems heats up the fuel to such an extent that it has to be cooled before it flows back. The fuel returning from the injector flows through the fuel cooler .
1 Fuel supply pump, 2 Fuel temperature sensor, 3 Fuel cooler, 4 Fuel tank, 5 Expansion tank, 6 Engine cooling circuit, 7 Coolant pump, 8 Auxiliary cooler.
1 Valve body, 2 Screw, 3 Compression spring, 4 Edge seal, 5 Accumulator plunger, 6 Accumulator volume, 7 Conical seat.
Diesel filter: Function As in spark ignition engines, it is essential in a diesel engine to ensure that the fuel system is protected against contamination. Contaminants are introduced into the system during refueling or can get into the tank via the tank ventilation and thus into the fuel itself. The function of the fuel filter is to reduce contamination from particulates so as to protect the fuel injection system.
Compared with gasoline injection systems, diesel fuel injection systems require increased wear protection and finer filters to cater for the much higher injection pressures. Diesel fuel is also more heavily contaminated than gasoline.
Design Diesel filters are designed as easychange filters . Spiral vee shape filter elements are the preferred choice. The diesel fuel filter is installed in the low pressure circuit: in suction systems upstream of the fuel supply pump and in pressure systems downstream of the electric fuel pump. The trend is now towards pressure systems.
Requirements Requirements In the last few years, the requirements for filter fineness have become more stringent owing to the introduction of common rail systems with higher injection pressures and advanced unit injector systems for passenger cars and commercial vehicles. Depending on the application . The fuel filters fitted to the latest generation of automobiles must be capable of storing larger volumes of particulates due to the longer service intervals, and of separating superfine particulates  efficiently. This can only be achieved by using special filter media, e.g. consisting of multiple layers made of synthetic microfiber. These filter media exploit the effects of a fine prefilter, and guarantee maximum particulateretention capability by separating particulates inside each filter layer.
1 Water drain plug, 2 Fuel inlet, 3 Fuel outlet, 4 Filter cover with galvanized coating, 5 Radial vee form filter element with  two ply filter medium, 6 Compression proof housing made from Galfan , 7 Tube to drain, 8 Water accumulation chamber, 9 Water level and temperature sensors. SMK2121Y 6 9 5 4 3 1 2 8 7
Water separation A second essential function of the diesel filter is to separate emulsified and free  water in order to prevent corrosion  damage. An effective water separation of more than 93 % at rated flow . Conductivity sensors are used in some cases to monitor the water level. The water is drained manually by opening a water drain plug or pressing a pushbutton switch.
For extra heavy duty requirements, it is beneficial to fit an additional preliminary filter with water separator on the suction or pressure side. Preliminary filters of this type are mostly used for commercial  vehicles in countries where diesel quality is poor.
Modular additional functions New generation diesel fuel filters integrate modular additional functions such as, for example, fuel preheating to prevent par affin clogging during winter operation. Fuel preheating can be effected electrically or by utilizing the hot fuel return flow from the engine. In the first instance, PTC heaters are installed in the filter. The second instance requires the fitting of a bimetal valve or a wax expansion element which opens at low temperatures and allows fuel to flow back to the filter. Further additional functions are maintenance indication by way of differentialpressure measurement and filling and venting devices.
________________________________ References References ISO/TS 13353:2002: Diesel fuel and petrol filters for internal combustion  engines Initial efficiency by particle counting.
 ISO 19438:2003: Diesel fuel and petrol filters for internal combustion engines Filtration efficiency using particle counting and contaminant retention capacity.
System overview: Requirements The demands placed on diesel engine fuel injection systems are continually increasing. Higher injection pressures, faster injector switching times, and a variable rate of discharge curve modified to the engine operating state have made the diesel engine economical, clean, and powerful.
The main advantage of the common rail system .
The common rail system is a highly flexible system for adapting fuel injection to the engine. This is achieved by an injection pressure adapted to the operating status of 200 to 2,500 bar, a variable start of injection, and the possibility of using pre injection and secondary injection events . In this way, the common rail system helps to raise specific power output, lower fuel consumption, reduce noise emission, and decrease pollutant emission in diesel engines.
1 High pressure pump, 2 Rail, 3 Injectors. Engine Electronic Diesel Control 
Fuel supply In common rail systems for passenger cars and light duty commercial vehicles, electric fuel pumps or gear pumps are used to deliver fuel to the high pressure pump. It is exclusively gear pumps that are used for heavy duty commercial vehicles .
system, an electric fuel pump permits in parallel the operation of suction jet pumps in the tank; these pumps fill the swirl pot and thus ensure the presence of fuel in the intake area .
The electric fuel pump is usually part of the in tank unit . The maximum delivery rate is, depending on engine performance, 150 to 240 l/h.
c) Demand controlled radial piston pump: two actuator system with pressure control on the suction side via the metering unit and pressure control on the high pressure side via the pressure control valve.
1 Fuel tank, 2 Fuel filter,  3 Preliminary filter, 4 Electric fuel pump, 5 Rail, 6 Rail pressure sensor,  7 Solenoid valve injector,  8 Pressure control valve,  9 Continuous delivery high pressure pump, 10 Demand controlled high pressure pump with mounted gear presupply pump and metering unit, 11 Demand controlled high pressure pump with metering unit, 12 Piezo injector, 13 Pressure limiter.
10 6 13 2 1 3 7 5 b 11 6 8 2 1 12 5 3 4 c a 5 6 8 2 1 3 7 9 4
particular for hot starts, since the delivery : rate of the gear pump is lower when the fuel is hot, and therefore, thinner, and at low pump speeds. In addition, the electric fuel pump ensures the operation of suction jet pumps in the tank.
Fuel filtering In passenger car systems with an electric fuel pump the fuel filter is located on the pressure side between the electric fuel pump and the high pressure pump. In systems with a gear pump the fuel filter is fitted between the fuel tank and the gear pump. In contrast, the fuel filter .
Pressure generation In the common rail pressure accumulator fuel injection system, the functions of pressure generation and fuel injection are separate. The injection pressure is generated independent of the engine speed and the injected fuel quantity. Electronic Diesel Control controls each of the components. The functions of pressure generation and fuel injection are separated by the rail's accumulator volume. The pressurized fuel is held in the accumulator volume ready for injection.
A continuously operating high pressure pump driven by the engine produces the desired injection pressure. Pressure in the fuel rail is maintained irrespective of engine speed or injected fuel quantity. The high pressure pump is a radialpiston pump. On commercial vehicles, in contrast to passenger cars, an in line pump is sometimes fitted.
commercial vehicles  Demand controlled two plunger in line pump with pressure control on the  suction side via the metering unit.
1 Fuel tank, 2 Preliminary filter,  3 Fuel filter,  4 Gear presupply pump,  5 High pressure pump,  6 Metering unit, 7 Rail pressure sensor,  8 Rail,  9 Pressure limiter, 10 Injector.
Fuel delivery control on the suction side: Fuel delivery control on the suction side Another way of controlling rail pressure is to control fuel delivery on the suction side combines pressure control on the suction side via the metering unit and control on the high pressure side via the pressure control valve, thus marrying the advantages of suction side fuel delivery control with the dynamic response of control on the high pressure side. Another advantage compared with control on the low pressure side only is that the high pressure side is also controllable when the engine is cold. The high pressure pump then delivers more fuel than is injected and pressure is controlled by the pressure control valve. Compression heats the fuel, thus eliminating the need for an additional fuel heater. Fuel injection The injectors spray fuel directly into  the engine's combustion chambers. They are supplied by short high pressure fuel lines connected to the fuel rail. The engine control unit controls the switching valve integrated into the injector to open and close the injector nozzle.
The injector opening times and system pressure determine the quantity of fuel delivered. At a constant pressure, the fuel quantity delivered is proportional to the switching time of the solenoid valve. This is, therefore, independent of engine and pump speeds . Hydraulic performance potential Separating the functions of pressure generation and fuel injection opens up further degrees of freedom in the combustion process compared with conventional fuelinjection systems; the injection pressure is more or less freely selectable within the program map.
The common rail system allows a further  reduction in exhaust gas emissions by introducing pre injection events and multiple injection events and also attenuating combustion noise significantly. Multiple injection events of up to seven per injection cycle can be generated by triggering the rapid action switching valve several times. Hydraulic pressure is used to augment nozzle needle closing, ensuring rapid termination of the injection process. Control and regulation Operating principle Operating principle The engine control unit detects the accelerator pedal position and the current  operating states of the engine and vehicle by means of sensors .
Basic functions Basic functions The basic functions involve the precise control of diesel fuel injection timing and fuel quantity at the reference pressure. In this way, they ensure that the diesel engine has low consumption and smooth running characteristics.
Correction functions for calculating : Correction functions for calculating  injection time injection time A number of correction functions are available to compensate for tolerances between the fuel injection system and the engine.
Fuel balancing control These tolerances result in different torque build up of individual cylinders. The consequences of these torque differences  are irregular engine running and increased exhaust gas emissions. Injectedfuel quantity corrections are calculated from the resulting speed fluctuations. Smooth running is increased by specifically adapting the injection time for each cylinder .
Injector delivery compensation Injector delivery compensation enables the fuel quantity deviations of brand new injectors to be corrected. To this end a wide range of measured data is recorded during injector production for each injector and then applied to the injector in the form of a data matrix code. Information about the lift behavior is also added for a piezo in line injector. These test data are transmitted during vehicle production to the engine ECU. These values are used during engine operation to compensate deviations in metering and switching performance.
Zero delivery calibration To achieve both noise reduction and emission targets it is particularly important to be safely in control of small pre injections over the service life of the vehicle. Injector fuel quantity drifts must therefore be compensated. To this end a small quantity of fuel is specifically injected into a cylinder in overrun conditions. The speed sensor detects the resulting torque increase as a small dynamic change in speed. This torque increase which is not felt by the driver is clearly linked to the injected fuel quantity. The process is repeated in succession for all the cylinders and for different operating points. A learning algorithm establishes the smallest changes in the pre injection quantity and corrects the activation duration for the injectors accordingly for all the pre injections.
Fuel quantity mean value adaptation The deviation of the actually injected fuel quantity from the setpoint value is required to correctly adapt exhaust gas recirculation and charge air pressure. Fuel quantity mean value adaptation determines the value for the fuel quantity averaged over all the cylinders from the signals from the l sensor and the air mass meter. Correction values for the injected fuel quantity are calculated from the comparison of setpoint and actual values.
Supplementary functions Supplementary functions Additional openand closed loop control functions perform the tasks of reducing exhaust gas emissions and fuel consumption, or providing added safety and convenience. Examples of such functions are control of exhaust gas recirculation, boost pressure control, cruise control, and the electronic vehicle immobilizer.
The integration of Electronic Diesel  Control in a vehicle's overall system network facilitates the exchange of data with, for example, transmission control or air conditioning. A diagnosis interface facilitates the analysis of stored system data when the vehicle is serviced.
Injectors: Solenoid valve injectors Design and operating principle Design and operating principle The solenoid valve injector can be subdivided into a number of function modules: the injection nozzle, the hydraulic servo valve to actuate the valve plunger, the nozzle needle, and the solenoid valve.
The fuel is routed from the high pressure port via an inlet passage to the injection nozzle and via the inlet restrictor into the valve control chamber. The valve control chamber is connected by the outlet restrictor, which can be opened by the solenoid valve, to the fuel return.
The function of the injector can be subdivided into four operating states when the engine and the high pressure pump are  operating. The operating states are caused by the balance of forces acting on the injector components. The nozzle spring closes the nozzle when the engine is not running and there is no pressure in the rail. All the solenoid valve injectors have a hydraulic port on the solenoid group for the return flow to the low pressure system. The return flow is made up of the control quantity . To increase hydraulic efficiency, injectors with a maximum injection pressure greater than 2,000 bar have no leakage at the nozzle guide and valve plunger.
Nozzle closed . The solenoid valve, in response to the force of the solenoid valve spring, closes the valve seat, thereby stopping the flow through the outlet restrictor. Inside of the valve control chamber, the pressure rises to the pressure in the fuel rail. The same pressure is also present in the nozzle chamber. The forces acting on the end faces of the control plunger resulting from the fuel rail pressure and the force of the nozzle spring hold the nozzle needle in the closed position against the opening force acting on the pressure shoulder of the needle.
a) Nozzle closed , 16 Injection nozzle needle.
tromagnet exceeds the spring force of the solenoid valve spring. The armature opens the valve completely in the ensuing pickup current phase. This releases the flow through the outlet restrictor . After a short time, the increased pickup current is reduced to a lower holding current.
When the outlet restrictor opens, fuel flows from the valve control chamber to the armature chamber and then via the fuel return line to the fuel tank. The pressure in the valve control chamber drops. Fuel flows continuously through the inlet restrictor into the control chamber. This prevents the pressure in the control chamber from dropping completely. The flows of the outlet and inlet restrictors are adapted to the dynamic response  of the solenoid valve. The pressure at the nozzle needle remains at the level of that in the rail. The reduction in pressure in the valve control chamber reduces the force acting on the control plunger and opens the nozzle needle. Fuel injection commences. Nozzle open The rate of movement of the nozzle needle is determined by the difference in the flow rates through the inlet and outlet restrictors and by the area ratios at the nozzle needle and valve plunger. Fuel is injected into the combustion chamber at a pressure approaching that in the fuel rail.
The balance of forces in the injector is similar to that during the opening phase. At a given rail pressure, the fuel quantity injected is proportional to the length of time that the solenoid valve is open. This is entirely independent of the engine or pump speed . When the outlet restrictor closes, pressure in the control chamber rises again to that in the fuel rail via the inlet restrictor. The higher pressure exerts a greater force on the control plunger. The force on the valve control chamber and the nozzle spring force then exceed the force acting on the nozzle needle, and the nozzle needle moves in the direction of the nozzle body seat. The flow from the inlet restrictor and the area ratios at the nozzle needle and valve plunger determine the speed with which the nozzle needle closes. The fuel injection cycle comes to an end when the nozzle needle is resting against its seat, thus closing off the injection orifices.
This indirect method is used to trigger the nozzle needle by means of a hydraulic servo system because the forces required to open the nozzle needle rapidly cannot be generated directly by the solenoid valve. The control quantity required in addition to the injected fuel quantity passes through the valve control chamber restrictors into the fuel return.
Multiple injections of up to ten injection pulses are possible within one injection cycle with the latest injector types. The minimum possible time interval is  approximately 150 us.
Pressure loaded ball valve In the case of a pressure loaded ball valve, the pressure of the compressed fuel acts on the area resulting from valve seat  angle and ball diameter . This pressure generates an opening force. The spring force must be at least of sufficient magnitude that valve remains closed in the non active state. In practice, the spring force is approximately 15 % greater than the hydraulic force at maximum injection pressure in order on the
one hand to achieve a sufficient dynamic : response when the valve closes, and on the other hand to ensure sufficient leak tightness when closed.
Pressure compensated valve In the case of a pressure compensated valve, there is no area on which the pressure acts and a force can be generated in the opening direction .
Bosch offers solenoid valve injectors for passenger cars and light commercial  vehicles up to 1,800 bar with a pressure loaded ball valve. To meet the highest demands in modern diesel engines pressure compensated valves are used from 1,800 bar, since a maximum valve opening cross section can also be attained at these high pressures. This improves the hydraulic stability of the servo valve with which the needle lift is controlled. In addition, the valve lift is also significantly reduced at high rail pressures in order also to achieve the required dynamic response for injection pressures in excess of 1,600 bar and to reduce the sensitivity of the valve dynamic response to external influences. The required minimum time intervals between two injections are achieved on account of the high dynamic response. The power demand for triggering the solenoid valves can also be reduced.
These injector variants with a pressure compensated valve have a potential for rail pressures in excess of 2,000 bar. There is also the possibility of damping pressure pulsations in the injector with a mini volume and thereby increasing metering precision in the case of multiple injections.
ing the injected fuel quantity tolerances. Higher injection pressures By increasing the injection pressure, it is possible, with the same engine power, to improve combustion by reducing the injection orifice diameter at the nozzle and to lower the untreated emissions that arise in the combustion chamber. Solenoid valve injectors are currently available for a maximum pressure of 2,500 bar.
3 Valve section with valve sealing seat, 4 Counter bearing,  5 Solenoid valve spring, 6 Armature pin in solenoid assembly  , 9 Valve section with outlet restrictor  and valve chamber, 10 Outlet restrictor, 11 Valve chamber.
a p Fp b 1 5 3 Fv d   a   a/2 6 2 7 10 11 DS 4 8 9
Metering precision: To improve the metering precision of the injected fuel quantity, sensors are available with which the opening time of the valve and the nozzle needle can be measured and a control loop can be established with software programmed in the engine ECU. Then the opening time of the solenoid valve and consequently the opening time of the nozzle needle can be regulated via the activation period. In this way, it is possible to eliminate to a large extent the deviation of the injected fuel quantity through external influences .
In Bosch solenoid valve injectors this sensor is integrated in the solenoid of the pressure compensated valve . The pressure in the valve control chamber is transferred via the armature pin and the pressure distributor to a piezo sensor; the piezo sensor uses the pressure force to generate an electrical signal. This is transmitted via an additional pin in the injector connector to the engine ECU, where it is evaluated.
The pressure characteristic in the control chamber correlates with the opening of the valve and the closing of the nozzle needle. In this way, a control loop can be established to regulate the injected fuel quantities.
piezo sensor in the solenoid assembly 1 Valve control chamber, 2 Piezo sensor element, 3 Discharge fitting,  4 Pressure distributor, 5 Electrical connection , 10 Extrusion coating, 11 Nozzle needle, 12 Valve spring, 13 Armature pin, 14 Diffuser geometry.
a high pressure solenoid valve for  a single injection event a Opening phase, b Pickup current phase, c Transition to holding current phase, d Holding current phase, e Switch off.
Triggering the solenoid valve injector: Triggering the solenoid valve injector Triggering of the solenoid valve is divided into five phases . When this voltage is applied across the solenoid valve, the current increases several times faster than it does when only battery voltage is used. During the pickupcurrent phase, battery voltage is applied to the  solenoid valve. Current control limits pickup current to approx. 20 A.
In order to reduce power loss in the ECU and injector, the current is dropped to  approx. 13 A in the holding current phase. The energy which becomes available  when pickup current is reduced to holding current is routed to the booster voltage capacitor.
The solenoid valve is closed when the current is switched off, and energy is also released in the process. This energy is also routed to the booster voltage capacitor. The difference between the energy drawn from the booster voltage capacitor and the energy returned to it is routed to the booster voltage capacitor via a step up chopper integrated in the ECU from the vehicle electrical system. Recharging from the vehicle electrical system is performed until the original voltage level required to open the solenoid valve is reached.
A direct response of the nozzle needle to piezo actuator operation is achieved by coupling the servo valve closely to the nozzle needle. The delay between the electric start of triggering and hydraulic response of the nozzle needle is about 150 us. At the same time, on account of the high switching force of the piezo actuator, a servo valve flight time of just 50 us and a practically bounce free switching time are achieved. This meets the contradictory requirements with regard to high nozzle needle speeds and extremely small reproducible injected fuel quantities.
inline injector 1 Fuel return, 2 High pressure port, 3 Electrical connection, 4 Piezo actuator, 5 Hydraulic  coupler, 6 Servo valve  , 7 Nozzle module with nozzle needle, 8 Injection  orifice.
injector otherwise contains no leakage : points between the high pressure and low pressure circuits. The result is an increase in the hydraulic efficiency of the overall system.
Up to eight injection pulses can be set per injection cycle. In this way, the injection can be adapted to the requirements of the respective engine operating point. The maximum possible number of injection pulses decreases in the upper rpm range. Operating principle of the servo valve Operating principle of the servo valve The nozzle needle on a piezo inline injector is controlled indirectly by the servo valve. The desired injected fuel quantity is set, taking into account the prevailing rail pressure, via the activation duration of the valve. In its non triggered state, the injector is in the starting position and the servo valve is closed , i.e., the high pressure section is separated from the low pressure section. The nozzle is kept closed by the rail pressure exerted in the control chamber.
the outlet and inlet restrictors lowers pressure in the control chamber and the nozzle opens. The control quantity flows via the servo valve to the low pressure circuit of the overall system and from there back to the fuel tank.
To start the closing process, the actuator is discharged, and the servo valve closes to release the bypass passage at the same time . The control chamber is then refilled by reversing the inlet and outlet restrictors, and the nozzle needle is closed again. The injection process is completed as soon as the nozzle needle reaches the nozzle seat again.
a) Start position, b) Nozzle needle opens . 1 Valve pin, 2 Outlet restrictor, 3 Control chamber,  4 Inlet restrictor, 5 Nozzle needle, 6 Bypass. UMK1985 3E
Operating principle of the hydraulic : Operating principle of the hydraulic coupler coupler Another vital component in the piezo inline injector is the hydraulic coupler . On the other hand, it adjusts the translation of actuator stroke and actuator force to the level required on the servo valve side. The translation ratio is obtained from the diameters of the coupler plunger and valve plunger.
The actuator module and the hydraulic coupler are immersed in the diesel fuel flow, which through the system low pressure circuit at the injector return is at a pressure of about 10 bar. When the actuator is not triggered, pressure in the hydraulic coupler is in equilibrium with its surroundings, and the coupler does not exert any force on the valve pin. Changes in length caused by temperature or clamping forces acting on the holder body are compensated by small leakages that flow via the guide clearances of the coupler and valve plungers between the coupler gap and the coupler surrounding area. This maintains a coupling of forces between the piezo actuator and the servo valve at all times.
1 Low pressure rail with pressure holding valve ,  6 Valve plunger spring, 7 Valve pin.
pressure in the coupler than in the sur : roundings, a small leakage volume flows through the plunger guide clearances out of the coupler into the low pressure circuit  of the injector. Even when the coupler is repeatedly actuated in quick succession during an engine combustion cycle, there is no significant effect on the injector function when the coupler is drained.
The quantity missing in the hydraulic coupler is refilled in the pauses between the triggering pulses of the piezo actuator. This occurs in the reverse direction via the plunger guide clearance, whereby the valve plunger spring generates a vacuum pressure of max. 10 bar inside the coupler against the surroundings. The guide clearances and the low pressure level are matched to refill the hydraulic coupler entirely before the next engine combustion cycle starts.
High pressure pumps : Design and requirements The high pressure pump is the interface between the low pressure and high pressure stages of the common rail system. Its function is to make sure there is always sufficient fuel under pressure in all engine operating conditions. At the same time, it must operate for the entire service life of the vehicle. This includes providing a fuel reserve that is required for quick engine starting and rapid pressure rise in the fuel rail.
The high pressure pump generates a constant system pressure for the highpressure accumulator independent of fuel injection. For this reason, fuel compared to conventional fuelinjection systems is not compressed during the injection process.
3 , 2and 1 plunger radial piston pumps are used as the high pressure pump to generate pressure. In a 3 plunger pump an eccentric shaft provides the stroke  motion for the pump plungers, while in 2and 1 plunger pumps this is provided  by a camshaft. 2 plunger in line fuel injection pumps are also used in commercial  vehicles.
Preferably, the high pressure pump is fitted to the diesel engine at the same point as a conventional distributor injection pump. The pump is driven by the engine via coupling, gearwheels, chain, or toothed belt. Pump speed is therefore coupled to engine speed via a fixed gear ratio.
1 Drive shaft with eccentric, 2 Polygon ring, 3 Pump plunger, 4 Suction valve , 5 Fuel supply, 6 High pressure outlet, 7 Outlet valve, 8 Element chamber, 9 Valve spring, 10 Plunger base plate.
central bearing and offset by 120deg. The : polygon ring fitted to the drive shaft  eccentric forces the pump plunger to move up and down. Force is transmitted between the eccentric shaft and the pump plunger via the plunger base plate attached to the plunger base.
separator to the inlet of the high pressure pump. The inlet is located inside the pump on passenger car systems with a gear pump flanged to the high pressure pump. An overflow valve is fitted behind the inlet. If the delivery pressure of the pre supply pump exceeds the opening pressure .
When the bottom dead center of the pump plunger is exceeded, the suction valve closes, and the fuel in the element chamber can no longer escape. It can then be pressurized beyond the delivery pressure of the presupply pump. When the  rising pressure exceeds the back pressure from the rail, the outlet valve opens and the compressed fuel passes into the highpressure circuit. The high pressure ports of the three pump elements are combined inside the pump housing so that only one high pressure line runs to the rail.
The pump plunger continues to deliver fuel until it reaches its top dead center position . The pressure then drops so that the outlet valve closes. The pump plunger moves downward in response to the force of the valve spring and the remaining fuel in the dead volume is depressurized.
When the pressure in the element chamber drops below the difference between the pre delivery pressure and the opening pressure of the suction valve, the suction valve reopens and the process starts over.
1 Flange, 2 Cylinder head, 3 Pump barrel, 4 Suction valve , 12 Pump housing, 13 Polygon ring, 14 Eccentric, 15 Shaft seal, 16 Input shaft.
mand at WOT is covered to the full extent. : Possible transmission ratios relative to the crankshaft are between 1:2 and 5:6, i.e. the high pressure pump is geared up. Pump speed is thus higher than engine speed. Higher transmission ratios are required for commercial vehicles on account of the low engine speeds.
Delivery rate Delivery rate As the high pressure pump is designed for high delivery quantities, there is a surplus of pressurized fuel when the engine is idling or running in part load range. This excess fuel is returned in first generation systems to the fuel tank via the pressurecontrol valve seated on the rail or flanged to the pump. As the compressed fuel expands, the energy imparted by compression is lost; overall efficiency drops. Compressing and then expanding the fuel also heats the fuel.
Demand control Demand control An improvement in energy efficiency is possible by means of fuel delivery control of the high pressure pump on the fueldelivery side .
1and 2 plunger radial piston pumps Requirements Requirements The delivery stroke of the pump elements causes pressure pulsations in the rail which give rise to fluctuations in injected fuel quantity in the 3 plunger pumps. In order to comply with the ever more stringent emissions limits, precision of injection coupled with minimal fluctuations in injected fuel quantity is increasingly gaining in importance. 1and 2 plunger radialpiston pumps facilitate injection synchronous delivery, i. e. the delivery stroke of the pump elements is synchronous with the induction stroke of the engine cylinders. In this way, the pump delivery for each engine cylinder is always at the same crankshaft angle.
With one or two pump elements, all engines with three to eight cylinders can be injection synchronously operated by adapting the transmission ratio of 1:2 to 1:1 between engine and pump speeds.
1 Plug with electrical interface, 2 Solenoid housing,  3 Bearing, 4 Armature with tappet, 5 Solenoid valve winding with coil body, 6 Bowl,  7 Residual air gap washer, 8 Magnetic core,  9 O ring, 10 Plunger with metering slots, 11 Spring, 12 Fuel supply, 13 Fuel outlet.
which converts the rotary motion of the camshaft via the cams into a stroke motion of the pump in the cylinder head. The camshaft is guided in the mounting flange and housing in two friction bearings.
The high pressure is generated in the pump element. 1or 2 plunger pumps are used, depending on the engine's displacement and number of cylinders. Two pump elements are required to cover the fuel demand of larger engines. In the 2 plunger version, the pump elements are arranged in a vee configuration at 90deg to each other.
The great overlap length between the cylinder wall and the pump plunger results in low leakage losses when the fuel is compressed. On the other hand, short leakage times result on account of the high delivery frequency and the small dead volume in the cylinder head in further optimization of efficiency and thus reduced fuel consumption.
The 90deg vee configuration of the cylinder heads in the 2 plunger pump means that there is no overlapping of the induction strokes. The charge of the two pump elements is therefore identical .
The high pressure port is connected to the rail by way of one highpressure lines. The high pressure is not condensed in the housing, but instead routed directly outwards from the cylinder head. The housing therefore does not require any high pressureand strengthincreasing measures.
1 Metering unit,  2 Pump element, 3 Pump housing,  4 Mounting flange,  5 Friction bearing,  6 Input shaft , 11 Pump plunger, 12 Roller tappet,  13 Roller support, 14 Drive roller, 15 Dual cam.
High pressure circuit High pressure circuit The fuel pilot controlled by the metering unit passes in the induction phase through the suction valve into the element chamber, and is compressed to high pressure during the ensuing delivery phase and delivered by the high pressure valve and the high pressure line to the rail.
Demand control with metering unit Demand control with metering unit The concept of the metering unit used on these pumps corresponds to that of the metering unit used for the 3 plunger radial piston pump ; however, they differ in their design.
Demand control with Demand control with electric suction electric suction valve valve The electric suction valve is, like the metering unit, a solenoid valve which is electrically activated. Unlike the metering unit, which is a proportional valve, the electric suction valve is a switching valve.
The electric suction valve is an actively controlled valve that is seated in place of a conventional suction valve on the injection pump cylinder head. The plunger chamber is filled with fuel in the high pressure pump suction phase. The suction valve is initially kept open during the delivery phase. The delivered fuel is routed back into the low pressure circuit until the desired fuel quantity is reached in the plunger chamber. The suction valve is then closed and the fuel quantity remaining in the plunger chamber is delivered to the rail. The electric suction valve is activated as a function of the cam rotation angle.
Design and function The electric suction valve consists of the magnet group and the hydraulic module. The suction valve is open at zero current. In its non activated state the suction valve is kept open via the armature spring against the hydraulic flow forces. When the suction valve is activated, the solenoid coil is energized to build up a magnetic field. The magnetic field generates a force in the armature which acts against the armature spring. If the magnetic force is greater than the spring force, the armature moves towards the pole body and thereby closes the suction valve.
Features of electric suction valve The electric suction valve offers more flexibility in activation for high efficiency engines. It is possible to determine with the cam angle dependent control process when the pump begins fuel delivery. This enables precise, dynamic rail pressure control.
Active opening of the suction valve creates very slight throttling effects during the suction phase, which results in high hydraulic pump efficiency.
A further feature of the electric suction valve to be highlighted is its capacity not to deliver any fuel to the rail despite the pump being driven. This results in the possibility of engine cutout.
1 Solenoid coil, 2 Armature spring, 3 Pole body, 4 Armature, 5 Flat connector, 6 Cylinder head of high pressure pump, 7 Valve plunger, 8 Plunger chamber of high pressure pump, 9 Compression spring, 10 O ring, 11 Union nut, 12 Solenoid sleeve.
2 plunger in line piston pump: Design Design This demand controlled high pressure pump for rail pressures up to 2,500 bar is only used in commercial vehicles. This is a 2 plunger pump with an in line design, i.e. the two pump elements are arranged one after the other in relation to the camshaft axial direction . This high pressure pump comes in both oil lubricated and fuel lubricated variants. A spring seat forms the positive link between the roller tappet and the pump plunger. The rotary motion of the camshaft is converted via the cams into a stroke motion of the pump plungers. The plunger spring ensures pump plunger return. The combined inlet and outlet valve is located at the top of the pump element.
A gear presupply pump with a high gear ratio is located on the camshaft extension. Its function is to draw fuel via the fuel inlet from the fuel tank and route it through the fuel outlet to the fuel fine filter. From there, the fuel passes through another line to the metering unit located on the upper section of the high pressure pump.
Lube oil is supplied either directly via the mounting flange of the pump or via a sidemounted inlet. The lube oil is returned to the engine oil pan.
Operating principle Operating principle When the pump plunger moves from top dead center towards bottom dead center, the suction valve opens on account of the fuel pressure . The fuel is drawn into the element chamber in response to the downward movement of the pump plunger. The outlet valve is closed by the valve spring.
As the pump plunger moves upwards, the suction valve closes and the enclosed fuel is compressed. When the rail pressure is exceeded, the outlet valve opens and the fuel is delivered through the highpressure port to the rail. This increases the pressure in the rail. The rail pressure sensor measures the pressure, from which the engine ECU calculates the triggering signals for the metering unit. The metering unit regulates the fuel quantity provided for compression according to the current demand.
1 Speed sensor  with valve spring, 10 Fuel supply to pump element, 11 Plunger spring, 12 Fuel supply from fuel tank, 13 Fuel outlet to fuel filter, 14 Gear presupply pump, 15 Overflow valve, 16 Concave cam, 17 Camshaft, 18 Roller bolt with roller, 19 Roller tappet, 20 Pump plunger, 21 Mounting flange.
Rail: Function The function of the rail is to maintain the fuel at high pressure. In so doing, the accumulator volume dampens pressure fluctuations caused by fuel pulses delivered by the pump and the fuel injection cycles. This ensures that, when an injector opens, the injection pressure remains constant. On the one hand, the accumulator volume must be large enough to meet this requirement. On the other hand, it must be small enough to ensure a fast enough pressure rise on engine start.
Application The tubular rail can vary depending on the various constraints which determine the way it is fitted to the engine. It has connections for fitting the rail pressure sensor and the pressure limiter or the pressurecontrol valve .
The pressurized fuel delivered by the high pressure pump passes via one or two high pressure fuel lines to the rail inlet. From there, it is distributed via high pressure lines to the individual injectors. The cavity inside the fuel rail is permanently  filled with pressurized fuel during engine operation.
The fuel pressure is controlled by means of Electronic Diesel Control , whereby the fuel pressure is measured by the rail pressure sensor and depending on the system regulated by demand control or via the pressure control valve to the desired value. The pressure limiter is used as an alternative to the pressure control valve depending on system requirements and its function is to limit fuel pressure in the fuel rail to the maximum permissible pressure in the event of a fault.
Some rail types make use of restrictors in the inlet and outlet which additionally dampen pressure pulsations caused by pump delivery and injections. If fuel is now drawn from the rail for an injection, the pressure is the rail remains virtually constant.
Rail types Two different rail types are used: the forged rail . Both types are used by Bosch, the hot forged rail being the preferred variant. The welded rail is used in series production up to 2,000 bar and is not subject to further development.
In the case of a hot forged rail, the blank for machining is produced by forging from bar stock. The internal geometry and the rail interfaces of the rail body are produced by deep hole boring, drilling and milling. A corrosion resistant surface is then applied. Finally, the add on components are mounted and functionally tested.
The forging process affords more possibilities in the shaping of the external  geometry than laser welding. One advantage is the possibility of shaping the external geometry with regard to weight optimization.
The forged rail is used for passengercar and commercial vehicle applications in series production up to 2,500 bar, and a further pressure increase is planned for the next generations.
pressure limiter 1 Fuel return , 4 Rail pressure sensor.
Unit injector system for : passenger cars System requirements The electronic controlled unit injector is a single cylinder pump injection system with integrated high pressure pump and injection nozzle . The high pressure line required in other injection systems between the injection pump and the injection nozzle is omitted. This means that the system has particularly good  hydraulic performance.
The unit injector is installed in the cylinder head between the valves, with the nozzle protruding into the combustion chamber. It is operated by rocker arms driven by the overhead engine camshaft. Each engine cylinder is allocated a separate unit injector. The start of injection and injection duration are calculated by an electronic control unit and controlled by the high pressure solenoid valve mounted externally on the pump body.
The unit injector system is  designed to meet the demands of modern direct injection diesel engines with high levels of power density. It is characterized by its compact design, high injection pressures of up to 2,200 bar at full load, and mechanical hydraulic pilot injection throughout the entire program map range to substantially reduce combustion noise. The compact design enables a very low high pressure volume with correspondingly high hydraulic efficiency.
1 Ball pin, 2 Return spring,  3 Pump plunger, 4 Pump body,  5 Magnetic core of high pressure  solenoid valve, 6 Armature,  7 Electrical connection,  8 Compensating spring,  9 Solenoid valve needle, 10 Electromagnet coil, 11 Fuel return , 29 Spring retainer chamber, 30 Engine cylinder head, 31 Integrated injection nozzle.
UMK1742 4Y 23 24 25 26 29 30 31 2 4 5 6 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 3 7 8 1 21 22 27 28
Operating principle: Intake stroke Intake stroke The unit injector is filled during the intake stroke of the upward moving pump plunger. Fuel flows from the low pressure stage of the fuel supply through the inlet holes into the unit injector. The fuel enters the high pressure chamber when the  solenoid valve seat is opened.
When the solenoid valve is still open, the fuel is forced back by the pump plunger from the high pressure chamber into the low pressure stage of the fuel supply. Heat is also dissipated from the unit injector is forced downwards and now lifts off its seat. A connection is established between high pressure chamber and accumulator chamber. The resulting pressure drop in the high pressure chamber, the increased pressure in the accumulator chamber and the simultaneous increase in the pre tension of the nozzle spring cause the nozzle needle to close. Pilot injection is terminated. However, the accumulator plunger does not return to its starting position because in its open state it offers the fuel pressure a greater working area than the nozzle needle.
Main injection Main injection The continuing movement of the pump plunger causes the pressure in the highpressure chamber to increase further. The nozzle opening pressure for main injection is at approximately 300 bar higher than pilot injection. There are two reasons for this. Firstly, the excursion of the accumulator plunger increases the pre tension of the nozzle spring. Secondly, due to the bypassing of the accumulator plunger fuel must be forced from the spring retainer chamber via a restrictor into the lowpressure stage of the fuel supply so that the fuel in the spring retainer chamber is compressed to a greater extent . The stroke and shaft diameter of the bypass plunger determine the length of the interval, the so called injection interval, between the end of pilot injection and the start of main injection.
When the nozzle opening pressure is reached, the nozzle needle is raised and fuel is injected into the combustion chamber . The pressure during the entire injection process continues to rise due to the high delivery rate of the pump plunger.
The current flow through the solenoidvalve coil is deactivated to terminate main injection. The solenoid valve opens and releases the connection between highpressure chamber and low pressure stage. The pressure collapses. When the nozzle closing pressure is undershot, the injection nozzle closes and the injection process ends. At this point the accumulator plunger also returns to its starting position. The remaining fuel is returned to the low pressure stage during the continuing
1 Hydraulic high pressure port,  2 Solenoid valve needle travel stop,  3 Engine block, 4 Pump body,  5 High pressure chamber,  6 Pump plunger, 7 Tappet spring,  8 Roller tappet shell,  9 Roller tappet, 10 Roller tappet pin, 11 Solenoid valve spring, 12 Armature plate, 13 Solenoid valve housing,  14 Solenoid valve needle, 15 Filter,  16 Fuel feed, 17 Fuel return,  18 Pump plunger retainer, 19 Spring seat, 20 Locating groove, 21 Tappet roller.
for commercial vehicles 1 Sliding disk, 2 Return spring, 3 Pump plunger, 4 Pump body, 5 Electrical connection,  6 High pressure chamber  ,  9 Fuel feed, 10 Spring retainer,  11 Pressure pin, 12 Intermediate ring, 13 Integrated injection nozzle, 14 Retaining nut, 15 Armature, 16 Electromagnet coil,  17 Solenoid valve needle, 18 Solenoid valve spring, 19 Nozzle needle.
UMK1230 3Y 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 18 19 17 16 15 11 12 13 14 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 8 10 15 18 19 20 21 16 17 14 13 12 11
for commercial vehicles this can be elec : tronically controlled in the lower speed and load range. This significantly reduces combustion noise and improves coldstarting performance.
Unit pump system for commercial vehicles The unit pump system . It permits injection pressures of up to 2,100 bar.
The separation of high pressure generation and injection permits a simpler mounting on the engine. The hydraulic performance is nevertheless very good due to the shortest line possible. The unit pump is mounted on the side of the engine block. It is operated directly by an injection cam on the engine's camshaft via a roller tappet. The injection nozzle is installed with a nozzle holder in the cylinder head. The lines are made of highstrength, seamless steel tubes. They must be of equal length for the individual pumps of an engine.
The method of solenoid valve actuation is the same as that of the unit injector system. When the solenoid valve is open, the fuel can be drawn into the pump barrel during the pump plunger's intake stroke, and return during the delivery stroke. Only when the solenoid valve is energized, and thus closed, can pressure build up in the high pressure system between the pump plunger and the nozzle during the pumpplunger delivery stroke. Fuel is injected into the combustion chamber of the engine once the nozzle opening pressure is exceeded.
Electronic control The solenoid valves are actuated by an electronic control unit. The ECU analyzes all of the relevant status parameters in the system relative to the engine and its environment, and defines the start of injection and injected fuel quantity for the operating state of the engine at any given time. The start of injection is also controlled by a BIP signal  in order to balance out the tolerances in the overall system. Start of injection is synchronized with engine piston position by analysis of the signals from an incremental trigger wheel.
In addition to the basic fuel injection functions, there are further functions for improving driving smoothness via a CAN data bus.
1 Engine, 2 Nozzle holder,  3 Injection nozzle, 4 High pressure line,  5 Solenoid valve, 6 Fuel feed,  7 High pressure pump ,  8 Camshaft.
Diesel distributor injection pumps were : used in large numbers from 1962 until after 2000. These pumps are used in 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 cylinder diesel engines in passenger cars, tractors and light and medium commercial vehicles. They generate up to 50 kW per cylinder, depending on engine speed and combustion system. Distributor injection pumps for direct injection  engines achieve a peak injection pressure of up to 1,950 bar in the nozzle at engine speeds up to 4,500 rpm.
A distinction is made between distributor injection pumps with mechanical control, and those with an electronic governor available in port controlled versions with a rotary magnet actuator and versions with solenoid valve open loop control. In passenger cars and commercial  vehicles, distributor injection pumps have been superseded by common rail systems.
Axial piston distributor pumps Body Fuel supply pump Fuel supply pump If no presupply pump is fitted in the  fuel injection system, this integral vane type supply pump draws fuel from  the tank and, together with a pressurecontrol valve, generates an internal pump pressure which increases with engine speed.
1 Angle of rotation sensor, 2 Drive shaft, 3 Support ring of vane type supply pump,  4 Roller ring, 5 Timing device, 6 Pump control unit, 7 Cam plate, 8 Distributor plunger,  9 High pressure solenoid valve, 10 High pressure connection, 11 Distributor bore. UMK1205 5Y 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 2 3 4 5
A clutch unit transfers the rotation of the : drive shaft to the cam plate and the distributor plunger fixed to it. When doing so, the claws of the drive shaft and the cam plate grip into the yoke positioned in between. The cam lifts on the underside of the cam plate turn against the rollers of the roller ring. As a result, the cam plate and distributor plunger perform a stroke movement in addition to the rotation. During each rotation of the drive shaft, the distributor plunger completes a number of strokes equal to the number of engine cylinders to be supplied.
The pump delivers fuel for as long as the spill port in the distributor plunger remains closed off during the working stroke. Delivery ends when the spill port is uncovered by the control collar  .
Electronic control for distributor injection pumps with rotary magnet actuator In contrast to the mechanically controlled distributor injection pump, the pump with rotary magnet actuator has an electronic governor and an electronically controlled timing device .
Electronic governor Electronic governor An eccentrically mounted ball head provides the connection between the distributor injection pump control collar and the rotary magnet actuator. The actuator's rotary setting determines the position of the control collar, and with it the effective stroke of the pump. A noncontacting position sensor is connected to the rotary magnet actuator.
The control unit receives various signals from the sensors: accelerator pedal position; engine speed; air, coolant and fuel temperature; charge air pressure; atmospheric pressure; etc. It uses these input variables to determine the correct injected fuel quantity, which is then converted to a specific control collar position with the aid of program maps stored in the unit's memory. The control unit varies the excitation current to the rotarymagnet actuator until it receives a signal indicating convergence between the setpoint and actual values for control collar position.
1 Vane type supply pump, 2 Timing device solenoid valve, 3 Timing device plunger,  4 Control collar, 5 Distributor plunger, 6 Roller ring ,  7 Rotary magnet actuator with position sensor, 8 ECU, 9 Eccentrically mounted ball head, 10 Spill port. Input and output variables: a Speed, b Start of injection,  c Temperature, d Charge air pressure,  e Accelerator pedal position, f Fuel return,  g High pressure line to injection nozzle, h Fuel supply.
start of delivery in relation to the engine : piston position is advanced or retarded. The signal from a sensor in the nozzleholder assembly, which indicates when the nozzle begins to open, is compared with a programmed setpoint value. The timing device solenoid valve connected to the working chamber of the plunger in the timing device varies the pressure above the timing device plunger and thus the position of the timing device. The  actuation clock ratio of the timing device solenoid valve is varied until the setpoint and actual values agree.
Electronic control for solenoid valve controlled distributor  injection pumps In the case of solenoid valve controlled distributor injection pumps , the fuel is metered by a high pressure solenoid valve which directly closes off the pump's element chamber. This permits even greater flexibility in fuel metering and for varying the start of injection. The main assemblies are the high pressure solenoid valve, the ECU, and the incremental angle/time system for angle/ time control of the solenoid valve using an angle of rotation sensor integrated in the pump.
The solenoid valve closes to define the start of delivery, which then continues until the valve opens. The injected fuel quantity is determined by the length of time the valve remains closed. Solenoid valve control permits rapid opening and closing of the element chamber independently  of engine speed. In contrast to mechanically governed pumps and pumps with a rotary magnet actuator, direct triggering by means of solenoid valves results in lower dead volumes, improved highpressure sealing, and therefore greater efficiency.
The fuel injection pump is equipped with its own, integral control unit for precise start of delivery control and fuel metering. Individual pump program maps and example specific calibration data are stored in this ECU.
The engine control unit determines the start of injection and delivery on the basis of engine operating parameters, and sends this data to the pump control unit via the data bus. The system can control both the start of injection and the start of delivery.
The pump control unit also receives the injected fuel quantity signal via the data bus. This signal is generated by the engine control unit according to the accelerator pedal signal and other parameters for torque demand. In the pump control unit, the injected fuel quantity signal and the pump speed for a given start of delivery are taken as the input variables for the pump map on which the corresponding actuation period is stored as degrees of cam rotation.
And finally, the actuation of the highpressure solenoid valve and the desired period of actuation are determined on the basis of the angle of rotation sensor integrated in the distributor injection pump. This sensor is used for angle/time control. It consists of a magnetoresistive sensor and a reluctor ring divided into 3deg increments interrupted by a reference mark for each cylinder. The sensor determines the precise angle of cam rotation at which the solenoid valve opens and closes. This requires the pump control unit to convert timing data to angular position data and vice versa.
The low fuel delivery rates at the start of injection, which result from the design of the distributor injection pump, are further reduced by the use of a two spring nozzle holder. With a hot engine, these low delivery rates permit low basic noise levels.
Pilot injection Pilot injection Pilot injection allows the combustion noise to be further reduced without sacrificing the objects of the system's design which aim at generating maximum power output at the rated power operating point. Pilot injection does not require additional hardware. Within a matter of milliseconds, the electronic control unit actuates the solenoid valve twice in rapid succession. For the first injection, only a small amount of fuel is discharged to condition the combustion chamber. The solenoid valve controls the injected fuel quantity with a high degree of precision and dynamic response. Typical pilot injection fuel quantities are 1.5 mm3.
Radial piston distributor : pumps Body High pressure pump High pressure pump The radial piston high pressure pump  of the distributor shaft.
The drive shaft drives the drive plate  by means of radially positioned guide slots. The guide slots simultaneously act as the locating slots for the roller supports. The roller supports and the rollers  held by them run around the inner cam profile of the cam ring that surrounds the drive shaft. The number of cams corresponds to the number of cylinders in the engine.
The drive plate drives the distributor shaft. The head of the distributor shaft holds the delivery plungers which are aligned radially to the drive shaft axis .
1 Sensor , 2 Pump control unit, 3 Distributor shaft, 4 Solenoid valve needle,  5 Valve body, 6 Timing device, 7 Radial piston pump, 7.1 Cam ring, 7.2 Roller,  7.3 Distributor shaft, 7.4 Delivery plunger, 7.5 Roller support, 8 Timing device solenoid valve,  9 Delivery valve, 10 High pressure solenoid valve, 11 Drive shaft. 1 View A A 3 4 5 2 10 11 9 8 7 6 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.5 UMK1227 3E
The delivery plungers rest against the : roller supports. As the roller supports are forced outwards by centrifugal forces, the deliver plungers follow the profile of the cam ring and describe a cyclical reciprocating motion.
When the delivery plungers are pushed inwards by the cams, the volume in the central plunger chamber between the delivery plungers is reduced. This compresses and pumps the fuel when the solenoid valve is closed. The fuel is  directed through passages in the distributor shaft at defined times to the appropriate outlet delivery valves.
As the cam drive design employs a direct, positive link, flexibility and compliance remain minimal, so the performance potential is greater. Fuel delivery is shared between at least two radial plungers. The small inertial forces involved mean that steep cam profiles are possible. The fuel delivery rate can be further increased by increasing the number of delivery plungers.
Radial piston distributor pumps for direct injection engines achieve elementchamber pressures up to 1,100 bar and pressures in the nozzle up to 1,950 bar. Electronic control system High pressure solenoid valve High pressure solenoid valve The high pressure solenoid valve opens and closes in response to the triggering signals of the pump control unit. The length of time it remains closed determines the delivery period of the highpressure pump. This means that the fuel quantity can be very precisely metered for each individual cylinder.
The high pressure solenoid valve is controlled by regulating the current. The pump control unit identifies the contact of the valve needle in the valve seat using the current curve. This allows the exact point at which fuel delivery starts to be calculated and the start of injection to be controlled very precisely.
Timing devices Timing devices The hydraulically assisted timing device rotates the cam ring in such a way that the start of delivery in relation to the engine piston position is advanced or retarded. The interaction between the high pressure solenoid valve and the timing device thus varies the start of injection and the injection pattern to suit the operating status of the engine.
The cam ring engages in a cross slot in the timing device plunger by means of an adjuster lug so that the axial movement of the timing device plunger causes the cam ring to rotate. In the center of the timing device plunger is a control collar which opens and closes the control ports in the timing device plunger. In axial alignment there is a spring loaded hydraulic control plunger which defines the required position for the control collar. Under the control of the pump control unit, the timing device solenoid valve modulates the pressure acting on the control plunger.
The timing device solenoid valve acts as a variable throttle. It can vary continuously the control pressure so that the control plunger can assume any position between the fully advanced and fully  retarded positions.
Version with full electronic circuitry  Version with full electronic circuitry  on injection pump on injection pump The latest generation of distributor injection pumps are compact, self contained systems incorporating an electronic control unit to control both the pump and the engine management functions.
As a separate engine control unit is no longer required, the fuel injection system requires fewer connectors and the wiring harness is less complex, thus making  installation simpler.
Fuel injection system: The injection pump is a component part of the fuel injection system , the high pressure component, the injection components and the control system. The fuel supply system accumulates and filters the fuel. If necessary, an additional fuel pump is present. The injection pump with the lines is the high pressure component. It generates the high pressure and distributes it at the right time to the corresponding engine cylinders.
In distributor pump injection systems, the injection component comprises the injection nozzles and the nozzle holders. These nozzle holder assemblies come in a wide range of types. One nozzle holder assembly is used on each cylinder. They are mounted with brackets or with hollow  screws in the cylinder head. The functions of the injection nozzles are to inject metered quantities of fuel and to prepare the fuel, to shape the injection pattern, and to provide a seal against the combustion chamber. Each injection nozzle consists of the nozzle body with several injection orifices  and the engine combustion chamber.
The mechanical or electronic control system for the distributor injection pump is mounted on the pump itself. Some systems have a separate engine control unit. Versions with electronic control are equipped with numerous sensors and  setpoint generators.
1 Engine control unit, 2 Glow control unit, 3 Air mass sensor, 4 Accelerator pedal sensor, 5 Injection nozzles, 6 Sheathed element glow plugs, 7 Distributor injection pump  with pump control unit, 8 Fuel filter, 9 Temperature sensor, 10 Speed sensor.
Start assist systems for diesel engines: Preheating systems for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles Hot diesel engines start spontaneously at low outside temperatures. Here, the spontaneous ignition temperature for diesel fuel of 250 degC is achieved with the engine turning at starting speed by compression. Cold diesel engines require, depending on their compression ratio, start assistance with glow plugs at low ambient temperatures .
The use of preheating systems extends far beyond pure start assistance. Thus, in driving mode the glow plugs can be consistently activated when the engine is hot in order to optimize combustion in all operating states.
Design and function of a preheating system Preheating systems , and preheating software in the engine management. The low voltage preheating systems mostly used today require glow plugs with nominal voltages below the vehicle system voltage whose heating output is adapted via the electronic glow control unit to the engine requirement.
The preheating software in the engine ECU starts and ends the preheating process as a function of the parameters stored in the software . The supply voltage to the glow plugs is set with pulse width modulated activation to values below the vehicle system voltage. Direct operation at vehicle system voltage would destroy the glow element on account of the lower nominal voltage.
engine cooling due to coasting or to support particulate filter regeneration. In order to achieve as quickly as possible the heating temperature required for engine starting during pre heating, the glow plugs are briefly operated in this phase with push voltage, which is above the glow plug nominal voltage. The activating voltage is then reduced to the glow plug nominal voltage during standby heating. During start heating, the activation voltage is increased again in order to compensate for the cooling of the glow plug by the cold intake air. This is also possible in the postand intermediateheating phases. The required voltage is taken from a number of program maps that are adapted to each engine. The program maps contain among others the parameters engine speed, injected fuel quantity, time after starter release, and coolant temperature.
Map controlled activation reliably prevents thermal overloading of the glow plugs in all engine operating states. The heating function implemented in the engine ECU contains an overheatingprotection facility in the event of repeat heating.
1 Plug connector,  2 Insulator shim, 3 Double seal,  4 Terminal stud,  5 Housing,  6 Element seal,  7 Control filament,  8 Glow tube,  9 Magnesium oxide  powder  , 10 Heating filament.
Whereas the heating filament has an electrical resistance that is independent of temperature, the control filament has a positive temperature coefficient . Its resistance increases as the temperature rises.
The heating filament is welded into the cap of the element sheath for grounding. The control filament is contacted at the terminal stud, which establishes the connection to the vehicle electrical system. The glow element is tapered at the front in order to accommodate the heating filament closer to the element sheath. This allows preheating rates of up to 1,000 degC within 3 s with the push mode . The maximum heating temperature is in excess of 1,000 degC. The temperature during start standby heating and in postheating mode is approx. 980 degC.
Glow plugs with 11 V nominal voltage are practically no longer used in passenger cars due to their longer heat up time. Operation Operation When voltage is applied to the glow plug, most of the electrical energy of the heating filament is initially converted into heat. The temperature at the tip of the glow plug increases sharply. The temperature of the control filament and with it also the impedance increase with a time delay. The current draw and thus the total heating output of the glow plug decrease and the temperature approaches a steady state condition. By controlling the operating voltage the temperature is kept below the critical level for the glow plug. Consequently, it can remain in operation for several minutes after the engine has started. This post heating function results in a more effective engine cold idle phase with substantially lower noise and emission output.
and soot emissions while simultaneously increasing the specific power. However, the cold starting and cold idling performance is more difficult to control in these engines due to the lower compression. Temperatures at the glow plug of up to 1,250 degC are required in order to achieve minimum exhaust gas opacity values and smooth running during cold starting and cold idling of these engines. Optimum combustion can only be achieved during the cold running phase by postheating lasting several minutes. These requirements can barely be satisfied with metal glow plugs.
Low voltage ceramic glow plugs Low voltage ceramic glow plugs have glow elements made of a ceramic material that is highly resistant to temperatures. Ceramic heating conductor tracks are embedded into the ceramic material. Their function is comparable to the filaments of metal glow plugs.
mediate heating at up to 1,250 degC. They : are designed for a nominal voltage of 7 V. Glow control unit The glow control unit sets the temperature at the glow plug stipulated by the engine management for the respective operating state. The supply voltage is pulse width modulated via a transistor for this purpose.
Applications Low voltage preheating systems require an application of the system matched to the respective engine in order to set the best temperature in each operating state and simultaneously protect the glow plug against being damaged by overvoltage. The respective activation voltage is stored in program maps.
Regulated preheating system Regulated preheating system The regulated preheating system was developed to minimize the application outlay. Ceramic glow plugs exhibit within certain limits a linear behavior between their temperature and their resistance. This behavior is used by an algorithm to calculate in the ECU the current temperature actually applied at the glow element and to automatically adjust the desired temperature accordingly.
Flame start systems : for commercial vehicle  diesel engines Requirements Commercial vehicle diesel engines can start down to temperatures of around 20 degC with start assistance. The start durations are dependent on the compression ratio e and the fuel grade used .
Air preheating provides for safe, quick starting down to low outside temperatures. The battery and the starter are protected and fuel consumption is reduced in the starting and warm up phases.
At higher temperatures air preheating would not be necessary for safe starting, but does prevent the formation of white smoke .
Design There are two different types of flame start system: the flame start system with burner chamber and the flame glow plug. Flame start system with burner chamber Flame start system with burner chamber The flame start system with burner chamber consists of a nozzle holder on which a solenoid valve, a nozzle and a rod type glow plug are mounted. The nozzle holder is attached together with gaskets and the burner chamber by three screws to the charge air housing.
burner chamber 1 Nozzle, 2 Fuel line,  3 Nozzle holder, 4 Solenoid valve,  5 Rod type glow plug, 6 Burner chamber,  7 Charge air housing.
The fuel is drawn after the fuel system : fuel filter and routed to the solenoid valve via a fuel line. The solenoid valve controls the fuel flow while the flame start system is in operation. The glow plug is supplied with electrical power by the flame start control unit.
Flame glow plug Flame glow plug In contrast to the flame start system with burner chamber, the solenoid valve in the case of the flame glow plug is not mounted directly on the flame start system, but instead is connected by a fuel line to the flame glow plug. The flame glow plug also has a much more compact  design .
The glow plug integrated in the flame glow plug is enclosed in a vaporizer tube in the upper area and extends up to the protective tube at the end of the flame glow plug .
The flame start system is also shut down : if the engine is started before the indicator lamp goes out or is not started within 30 seconds of the indicator lamp going out. In this case the driver can put the flame start system into operation again by turning the ignition key back and then turning into to the drive position again. Control of the glow plug Glow plug for the flame start system Glow plug for the flame start system with burner chamber with burner chamber The glow plug is preheated depending  on the vehicle system voltage until a  temperature of approximately 1,050 degC is reached. This is followed by the beginning of the period of start readiness , during which the glow plug is  cyclically energized. The cycle ratio is set depending on the current vehicle system voltage in such a way that the glow plug temperature remains between 1,020 degC and 1,080 degC. With the glow plug in this temperature range the fuel is safely  ignited and the glow plug itself is not  exposed to thermal overload.
As soon as the engine is started, the solenoid valve opens, the fuel is directed through the nozzle and sprayed onto the spark plug grooves, where it ignites. In this phase the cycle ratio of the glow plug is increased by the control unit so that the glow plug does not cool in response to the heat dissipated from the vaporizing fuel. This higher cycle ratio is maintained after starting for a further period of around 30 s until all the components are heated and the flame is safely burning. The glow plug is now additionally heated by the flame. The control unit decreases the cycle ratio again to protect against overheating. After post flaming the glow plug is deactivated and monitored until it has cooled down entirely. Start and cold running support by the flame start system is concluded.
Flame glow plug Flame glow plug This glow plug is preheated in exactly the same way before starting, depending on the applied vehicle power supply. The preheating times are slightly longer than for the glow plug with burner chamber, since the vaporizer tube is additionally heated during preheating . When the engine is started, the solenoid valve is opened, fuel flows via the fuel supply connection and the metering device into the flame glow plug, strikes the hot glow plug, vaporizes between the glow plug and the vaporizer tube, and mixes with the air at the evaporatortube outlet. The air/fuel mixture ignites at the hot glow plug. The flame produced emerges from the protective tube and heats the intake air flowing past.
After preheating the flame glow plug is likewise cyclically energized. The cycle ratio is decreased in the start readiness period and increased again when the engine is started. In this phase the cycle ratio for the flame glow plug is higher than for the flame start system with burner chamber, since the fuel is vaporized via the supplied electrical energy and not via the burning flame.
Cooling down phase Cooling down phase The glow plug of the flame start system is monitored in the cooling down phase. If preheating is performed again in this phase, the control unit calculates the preheating time from a program map  depending on the cooling down time and the voltage in such a way that the glow plug reached the temperature range  described above.
Because the glow plugs have heating and control filaments , the optimum preheating time is set as a function of the ambient conditions.
Grid heater for : commercial vehicle  diesel engines The grid heater is used as a further coldstart aid, particularly for engines which are started under aggravated starting conditions such as constant load when starting .
Design The grid heater . Grid heaters with a power input of 1.8 kW are used for engines with a displacement VH of 4 to 10 l, while grid  heaters with a power input of 2.7 kW are used for engines with VH > 10 l.
Once the preheating time has elapsed, the indicator lamp goes out and the engine can be started. On starting the grid heater is switched off for approximately 2 s so as to make full battery capacity available to the starter. For start and idle support the grid heater is then switched back on and remains in operation until it is switched off after the applied postheating time.
The grid heater remains in start readiness for only around 5 s in order to conserve battery capacity.
1 Housing,  2 Mounting flange,  3 Cover plate,  4 Cover,  5 Mounting bore,  6 Lock nut,  7 Connecting thread bolt,  8 Retaining frame,  9 Heating filament, 10 Insulating plate.
As a rule noble metals, their mixtures or their alloys in the form of nanoparticles serve as the catalytically active component. Platinum and palladium are frequently used.
ponents are matched in such a way that the catalytic converter resists to a sufficient extent the loads of the vehicle application over the aimedfor service life.
Without further exhaust gas treatment measures it is not possible for a large number of vehicles to comply with strict particulate emission limits .
Filtration of particulates: To comply with the emission control standard Euro 6c, a passenger car, irrespective of whether it is powered by a direct injection gasoline engine or by a diesel engine, may not exceed the limit value for the particulate matter . There are also special forms made of sintered metal. Some of the residues of engine oil, fuel, combustion air, and engine attrition that collect in the particulate filter cannot be removed by combustion and, if suitably sized, remain as ash in the filter. On the other hand, soot and the organic compounds that adhere to it are combustible.  NO2 and O2 work as oxidizing agents. Oxidation with NO2 works at exhaust gas temperatures from around 200 to 250 degC. From around 450 degC NO prevails in the thermodynamic equilibrium of the nitrous fumes. Then there is little NO2 in the exhaust gas.
Catalytically oxidizing coatings of particulate filters do not differ in their type and function fundamentally from other oxidation catalytic converters. They serve to set a favorable NO NO2 ratio, oxidize imperfectly combusted fuel, and catalyze the CO that is produced during soot burn off. Regeneration of the particulate filter Soot is oxidized by oxygen only at temperatures above approximately 550 to 600 degC. Such temperatures exist in many diesel engines only with very  high power outputs and hardly ever  arise during the normal operation of  some vehicles. Measures must therefore be taken to raise the exhaust gas temperature. Combustion control of the engine, for example, is changed for this purpose.
HCI system HCI system As an alternative to injecting additional fuel into the engine cylinders, fuel can also be metered directly into the exhaust gas system. The HCI system . The fuel vapors oxidize in the catalytic converter, resulting in an increase in the temperature of the exhaust gas flow. The control algorithms of the HCI system are associated with soot mass determination.
Additive system Additive system In addition to the thermal measures to raise the exhaust gas temperature, the ignition temperature of soot can also be reduced. This is done by catalytically active components which are finely distributed into the soot. These components are supplied as a fuel additive . Organometallic compounds are used, for example ferrocene. The finely distributed metal oxides formed from them reduce the ignition temperature of soot by up to 150 K. One drawback is the ash that is created from this fuel additive.
Saturation detection Important factors in the design of particulate filters and their regeneration strategy are the amount of ash to be expected, the maximum soot load until regeneration is initiated, and the permissible exhaust gas back pressure.
1 Fuel pump, 2 Fuel tank, 3 Temperature sensor, 4 HC metering module, 5 HC metering unit, 6 Fuel filter, 7 Engine ECU, 8 Diesel oxidation catalytic converter, 9 Diesel particulate filter, 10 Differential pressure sensor.
Often two processes are used in parallel : for saturation detection. The particulate filter's flow resistance is calculated from the pressure drop of the exhaust gas flow detected with a differential pressure sensor over the particulate filter. It can be related to the amount of soot stored in the particulate filter. In addition, a model is used to calculate the soot mass stored in the particulate filter. To this end, the soot mass flow of the engine is integrated, where different corrections can be taken into consideration, e.g. for the soot oxidation of the particulates by NO2.
commodate the necessary exhaust gas treatment system. Special requirements with regard to the positioning of individual components in the vehicle must be observed .
1 Additive control unit, 2 Engine control unit, 3 Additive pump, 4 Fill level sensor, 5 Additive tank,  6 Additive injection nozzle, 7 Fuel tank, 8 Diesel engine, 9 Oxidation catalytic converter,  10 Particulate filter, 11 Temperature sensor, 12 Differential pressure sensor. NMA0043 1Y
The choice of a method of reducing NOx suitable for a concrete vehicle application is therefore always a consideration of the complete system. The two NOx storage catalytic converters and NOx reduction catalytic converters described below can also be used together, for example to achieve high conversion rates.
Engine based l control constitutes an alternation of oxygen richer and low oxygen exhaust gas sequences for this purpose. The oxygen enriched phase often lasts several minutes. An accordingly large amount of storage components is required to bind the NOx created during this period. The NOx previously bound to the storage components is reduced in the subsequent fuel enriched sequence. This sequence, known as NSC regeneration, usually takes a few seconds.
The NSC method works in particularly at exhaust gas temperatures of between around 180 degC and 400 degC. The NOx conversion of the NSC method deteriorates at significantly higher temperatures.
Contamination by sulfur reduces the efficiency of the noble metals and the NOx storage components. A storage catalytic converter must therefore be regularly desulfurated. High temperatures are required for this purpose. When it comes to the design of NOx storage catalytic converters, particular attention must be given to their long term behavior depending on the relevant engine application with the details of desulfuration.
Selective catalytic reduction SCR method SCR method The SCR method . Diesel fuel is basically also suitable here. However, it has hitherto not been possible to develop a suitable SCR method based on diesel fuel as the reducing agent that provides for compliance with strict emission limits.
1 Diesel engine, 2 Temperature sensor, 3 Wide band l sensor , 4 NOx storage catalytic converter, 5 NOx sensor or two position l oxygen sensor, 6 Engine control unit.
Aside from special forms, SCR catalytic converters frequently consist of catalytically active coatings on ceramic honeycomb structures. Special ceramic particulate filters are also suitable for such coatings. Vanadium oxides and iron and copper zeolites are suitable for use as the catalytically active material.
1 Diesel oxidation catalytic converter, 2 Temperature sensor, 3 Heater, 4 Filter, 5 Delivery module, 6 Metering module, 7 Metering control unit, 8 SCR catalytic converter, 9 NOx sensor,  10 Slip catalytic converter, 11 Urea solution tank, 12 Urea solution fill level sensor. 1 2 6 8 2 2 7 3 3 3 12 11 3 4 5 9 10 CAN drive Sensors Actuators CAN diagnostics UMA0085 1E
plosively according to equation contribute significantly to the overall conversion.
Choice of SCR catalytic converter Choice of SCR catalytic converter The engine emissions and the NOx conversion needed to achieve the emission limit and the exhaust gas temperature in the relevant operating states are decisive factors in the choice of a suitable SCR catalytic converter. However, the sulfur content of the fuel used is also important. When it comes to the design of the SCR catalytic converter, attention must also be given in particular to its long term stability depending on the concrete vehicle application, e.g. also with the details of desulfuration.
Metering of the reducing agent Metering of the reducing agent SCR catalytic converters do have a certain NH3 storage capacity, but essentially a quantity of urea/water solution equivalent to the instantaneous NOx mass flow must be metered as precisely as possible and dispensed into the exhaust system branch. If more reducing agent is dispensed than is converted in reduction with NOx, it may result in unwanted NH3 slip. This excess NH3 can be oxidized by an additional oxidation catalytic converter at the end of the SCR catalytic converter. In the most favorable case, nitrogen and water are created at this NH3 slip catalytic converter. Nitrogen oxides are created in secondary reactions in unfavorable circumstances.
Before entering each catalytic converter, the exhaust gas mass flow must be distributed as uniformly as possible to the individual honeycomb channels. Uniform distribution of the fluids requires particular attention in the case of two substance mixtures, i.e. if a second substance is added to the exhaust gas flow, as is the case with the SCR method.
The metering quantity is determined in a separate ECU of the exhaust gas treatment systems . In the process the current NH3 storage load of the catalytic converter is also calculated and taken into account as a rule. The data required for this calculation are determined in advance for the catalytic converter used in each case and stored as a program map in the ECU. To meter the required quantity as precisely as possible, it is necessary to bear in mind that ISO 22241 1 defines the urea content of these solutions at 31.8 to 33.2 % by mass. Significant deviations in the urea solution concentration can also arise as a result of their aging in the vehicle or incorrect storage. Quality sensors are therefore increasingly being used.
Delivery and Delivery and metering modules metering modules A delivery module as a rule consists of a liquid pump, e.g. a diaphragm pump. It provides the solution from the urea tank for metering. Since commercially available urea solutions freeze below 11 degC, all the components that are in contact with the solution must be able to withstand ice pressure. Some components have heating elements to melt the ice where necessary. The metered volume is dispensed via metering modules. These are primarily liquid nozzles, or more rarely air/ fluid two substance nozzles. The metering modules in contact with the hot exhaust
Vaporization of the solution is preceded by the distribution of the droplets sprayed into the exhaust gas flow. The spray characteristic, i.e. the droplet size and its impulse, must be closely matched with temperature and flow conditions in the affected part of the exhaust system branch. As a rule some of the droplets vaporize on hot surfaces of the exhaust system, e.g. on pipe walls or on gas mixers.
This comparatively slow hydrolysis reaction is significant in the gaseous phase merely in the case of a long retention time of very small droplets, which vaporize already in the gaseous phase at accordingly high temperatures. Hydrolysis of isocyanic acid therefore occurs for the most part on surfaces. As well as the most uniform distribution as possible of the created ammonia into the exhaust gas flow and its distribution as perfectly as possible through the catalytic converter cross section, it must also be borne in mind when designing that part of the exhaust system branch into which the agent is metered that solid by products may be created when urea decomposes. Surface temperatures of well over 300 degC are needed to eliminate their deposits.
On Board Diagnostics 20 years. Today OBD systems influence the vehicle's service inspection program and the driver and the workshop are informed of malfunctions and recommended actions. The OBD requirements applicable in each case must be taken into account in the design of the exhaust gas treatment system.
582/2011 of 25 May 2011 implementing and amending Regulation .
icant distances by electric only means. This corresponds to a large extent to the definition from the Gabler Dictionary of Economics ). With regard to other definitions, only vehicles with an electric motor  which draw their energy primarily from the mains supply network may be assigned to electromobility. Consequently, fuel cell vehicles which are run on hydrogen as their energy source are not assigned to electromobility.
Hybrid vehicles which can only cover short distances by electric means whose electrical machine therefore only has the task of supporting the internal combustion engine are on no account assigned to electromobility.
Electric vehicles and hybrid vehicles in their different design variations have an electrical machine which acts in some way on the drivetrain. They are therefore referred to as electrified drives.
reasons for this were the much greater : range of vehicles with internal combustion engines, the cheap fuel gasoline, the now comfortable process of starting the internal combustion engine with the starter, but also the problem with the traction batteries.
Rediscovery of the electrified drive Rediscovery of the electrified drive The electrification of the drive started to gather momentum only at the end of the 20th century with the demand for vehicles with lower exhaust gas emissions and the demand for reduced fuel consumption. The high fuel consumption of internal combustion engines results from the poor degree of efficiency of around 40 %. Electrical machines are at an advantage with an efficiency in excess of 90 %. However, the high volume application of electric drives powered by one battery with a suitably large battery capacity initially failed due to the embryonic battery technology and the high costs. Because there was minimal take up on electric vehicles owing to their limited range on one battery charge, vehicles with hybrid drives i.e., a combination of electric drive and internal combustion engine were offered as a technology to bridge the gap.
a battery voltage of typically 400 V offers the possibility of driving limited distances by electric only means with zero emissions locally.
be recharged for example at the power socket in the garage . The journey can thus be started with a fully charged battery; longer distances can by covered on electric only power with a larger battery compared with the full hybrid.
has an electric drive and also for example a small internal combustion engine. It is designed as an electric drive for electric only driving, with the corresponding performance of the electrical machine and traction battery. If the state of charge of the traction battery is no longer sufficient for propulsion, it is recharged by the combustion engine via a second electrical machine so that the vehicle can continue to be driven at reduced speed. In this operating mode this drive becomes a serial, externally rechargeable hybrid. Other concepts provide for the combustion engine to be mechanically connected directly to the drive . The combustion engine acts as a range extender.
duces the energy for propulsion continually from hydrogen and oxygen. A small back up battery is used to intermediately store the generated energy. With a large battery this can be used for the drive; a small fuel cell charges the battery as required and thus acts as a range extender.
The electrical machine of the microhybrid set out in Figure 1 is not designed power wise to make a contribution to the drive; this variant therefore is not a genuine hybrid.
1 Electrical machine , 7 Vehicle control  unit, 8 Regenerative  braking system, 9 Charging socket.
Interaction of the components Interaction of the components The traction battery . The vehicle is decelerated in the process. The service brake is only then activated if the electrical machine's braking power
0 40 20 60 80 100 % 0 20 40 60 80 Rotational speed n Torque, Mechanical power % 1 2 A B UAE1329D Electrification of the drive 973 is not sufficient for the desired deceleration . The service brake is thus simultaneously protected. The stored energy can be used for propulsion.
Hybrid drive Hybrid drives combine drives with combustion engine and electrical machine with suitably greater component outlay compared with a drive with combustion engine. There are different solutions, depending on the degree of electrification .
Because power is additionally made available by the electrical machine, the combustion engine can be designed with smaller dimensions to obtain the same overall power.
drives). The rotational speed when driving is so high that it must be adapted to the required wheel speed via a reduction gear unit. The torque transmitted to the wheels increases in the same proportion.
Transmission Transmission The high torque available over a wide rotational speed range enables the vehicle to be driven over a wide driving speed range with only one transmission reduction. Single stage transmissions are primarily used for passenger cars. Twospeed or multi speed transmissions are also used for sports cars which reach higher speeds and for commercial vehicles. A reverse gear is not required in the electric drive's transmission because the electrical machine changes the direction of rotation when activated accordingly. Consequently, the transmission for an electric drive is much simpler and compact in terms of design than the transmission of a drive system with combustion engine.
Efficiency Efficiency For a combustion engine the maximum efficiency is around 40 % in the low speed range at high load. A conventional route profile however requires part load in the event of poorer efficiency.
Electric drives operate independently of the operating point, i.e., even with a low load request, with an efficiency of over 90 %.
Energy consumption Energy consumption Because the efficiency of an electrical machine is significantly better than that of a combustion engine, energy consumption is lower for electric drives in an electric vehicle.
Zero local emissions: Zero local emissions The electric drive has zero local emissions. The charging current required to charge the battery does however, depending on how the current is generated, cause emissions at the point of origin. CO2 emissions are created if the current is produced in gasor coal fired power plants. Only if current from regenerative sources is used is the electric drive free from CO2 emissions.
Operating noises Operating noises The operating noises of an electrical machine are low such that an electric vehicle is very quiet at low speeds where the other driving noises are not yet pronounced.
Vibrations Vibrations Due to the rotational movement of the electrical machine, hardly any vibrations are generated in the drive in an electric vehicle.
Component outlay Component outlay The combustion engine with its extensive peripherals requires a lot of installation space. The components of an electric drive with the exception of the traction battery require much less space.
Advantages of a hybrid drive The electrical machine in a hybrid vehicle improves the utilization of the combustion engine compared with a drive solely with a combustion engine thanks to the following operating modes.
ated at a higher load point with greater efficiency , the energy required for propulsion is stored via the electrical machine in the battery and can be utilized later for propulsion. This improves fuel consumption. The amount of fuel that can be saved depends on the degree of hybridization.
power demand a full hybrid vehicle with electric drive and switched off combustion engine can drive in parts with zero emissions. The average fuel consumption of the combustion engine is lower in combination with the electric drive; as a result the CO2 emissions are also reduced.
with the electric drive; the combustion engine can be cut in from a specific speed while the vehicle is rolling. This delivers a quiet, low emission starting operation.
Compared with an electric vehicle the hybrid vehicle has the advantage of high range, comparable with that of a conventional vehicle with a combustion engine.
Electrified ancillary systems: The mechanical power dissipation of a drive system with internal combustion engine includes, as well as the engine friction losses, the outlay on driving the accessories. These include, for example, the coolant pump, the engine oil pump, the alternator, the high pressure pump for fuel injection, the brake vacuum pump, the air conditioning compressor, and the power steering pump for the hydraulic power assisted steering system. These accessories are typically driven for the most part by the internal combustion engine via V belts or toothed belts . The internal combustion engine must cater for the power demand of these accessories and also overcome the losses in the drive belt. This entails additional fuel consumption.
Demand control of the accessories The power consumption of the driven accessories can be reduced by demand oriented control. One example of this is intelligent alternator regulation. By specifying the control voltage it is possible to specifically control the power consumption. The alternator is still however driven via the lossy belt drive.
Electrically driven accessories The accessories are driven even when they are not required. One example of this is the power steering pump. When driving straight ahead on expressways/freeways steering assistance is only needed on rare occasions, but the power steering pump is permanently driven and causes losses. Electric power assisted steering, which only cuts in when steering assistance is required, has in the meantime gained acceptance for use in passenger car steering systems. The motivation behind these systems was however the possibility of realizing automated parking maneuvers.
Electrical driven accessories are no longer driven by the internal combustion engine and can thus be operated in terms of their speed independently of the engine speed. The speed and thus the power consumption of the accessories are adapted to the demand. As the speed reduces, so too do the friction losses in the accessories. Coolant and lubricant flows can thus be adapted to the load and speed of the internal combustion engine, which also impacts positively on the pollutant emissions.
Another advantage of electrified accessories is that they can even be operated while the engine is at a standstill if their operation is required during the standstill phase.
1 Crankshaft, 2 Air conditioning compressor, 3 Mechanically driven supercharger, 4 Tensioning system, 5 Alternator, 6 Coolant pump, 7 Power steering pump, 8 Toothed belt, 9 Electrical machine on crankshaft.
Regenerative braking system : In the case of regenerative braking , the vehicle's  kinetic energy during deceleration is converted by the electrical machine, which is operated as a generator for this purpose, into electrical energy. In this way, some of the energy which is normally lost as frictional heat during braking is fed in the form of electrical energy to the battery and then utilized.
Drag torque simulation A simple way of realizing regenerative braking is drag torque simulation. Here the electrical machine is operated as a generator as soon as the driver releases the accelerator. The driver does not need to press the brake pedal for this purpose. In the case of a full hybrid, the internal combustion engine is decoupled and the electrical machine exerts a generator torque of the magnitude of the engine's drag torque.
If the engine cannot be decoupled . The vehicle behavior changes only slightly compared with a non hybrid vehicle.
Simple regenerative braking  system During braking the electrical machine can exert an additional generator torque as well as drag torque simulation and increase. The vehicle decelerates with the brake pedal in the same position faster than a comparable conventional vehicle. The available generator torque depends on the driving speed, the selected gear, and the state of battery charge. Therefore the vehicle can be subject to different levels of braking response, even with the brake pedal in the same position. This difference in braking response is perceived by the driver to be all the more disruptive, the greater the generator torque is part of the vehicle deceleration. For this reason, only small power levels can be recuperated with this simple regenerative braking system.
Cooperatively regenerative braking system The service brake system must be modified in the case of higher decelerations in order to further exploit the kinetic energy. To this end all or some of the service brake friction torque must be replaced with a generator braking torque without the vehicle deceleration changing when the brake pedal position and brake pedal force are kept constant. This is realized in a cooperatively regenerative braking system, where the vehicle control and the braking system interact in such a way that constantly as much friction braking torque is recovered as generator braking torque can be replaced by the electrical machine.
During a braking operation the maximum generator torque that can be achieved by the electrical machine changes continuously over a wide speed range is constant in this range at high rotational speed. Only at low speeds is there a range of constant maximum electrical machine torque. If the speed continues to drop, the regenerative braking torque that can be achieved again drops to zero.
driving speed . During the braking operation from high driving speed to a standstill, therefore, the distribution between friction braking torque and regenerative braking torque is continuously adapted with constant pedal actuation.
ESC based regenerative braking  ESC based regenerative braking  system system For the technically simplest implementation of a cooperatively regenerative braking system essentially the hardware of a conventional ESC system and the operating strategy is enhanced by the recuperation functionality.
Basically, such a system can be operated both with an electromechanical and with a vacuum brake booster where the combination with an electromechanical brake booster offers additional advantages with regard to recuperation efficiency and redundancy for highly  automated driving. The back pressure of the low pressure reservoir can be reduced to further increase the recuperation efficiency. The exact relationship is described in more detail in the following. Operating principle A pedal travel sensor is additionally required to detect the driver's braking request. This sensor either is automatically made available in combination with an electromechanical brake booster or must be integrated in the system in combination with a vacuum brake booster by way of an additional external pedal travel sensor. The driver's braking request must be detected via the pedal travel sensor because the hydraulic pressure built up in the braking system during recuperation generally cannot be clearly assigned to a specific pedal position.
pared with the energy made available by : the generator). If additional pressure is requested during the braking operation, brake fluid is taken from the low pressure reservoir by means of the return pump and displaced into the wheel brakes .
During recuperation the hydraulic pressure in the braking system is as a rule below the expected pressure of a purely hydraulic braking operation. If the brake booster has not yet exceeded the point at which the brake pedal is hydraulically coupled with the braking system, the pressure reduction is not yet detected at the brake pedal. However, as soon as this point is overcome, the original pressure must in the case of a vacuum brake booster be built up at least on one axle in order to ensure an unchanged pedal force and a consistent pedal feel. On the other hand, when an electromechanical brake booster is used, the missing pressure can be compensated for by reducing the electromechanical assisting force so as not to experience any limitation in recuperation or any reduction in recuperation efficiency. The compensation of the missing system for an unchanged pedal feel is also called force blending.
, 3 Low pressure reservoir,  4 Non return valve.
HZ Brake master cylinder, RZ Wheel brake cylinder, HSV High pressure switching valve,  USV Switchover valve, EV Inlet valve, AV Outlet valve, V Front, H Rear, R Right, L Left. UFB0816 2E M pU RZ RZ HZ Volume blending Pressure build up VR EV EV HSV USV 1 2 3 4 AV AV HL
Braking force distribution As with the design of conventional brake systems, so too with the design of a regenerative brake system the braking force distribution between front and rear axles is of crucial importance to the vehicle's directional stability. As deceleration increases, the normal force on the front wheels increases while the normal force on the rear wheels decreases. If the electrical machine is connected to the front wheels, a greater wheel braking torque can also be transmitted with increasing deceleration and thus increasing normal force on the front axle. On a rear wheeldriven vehicle or a vehicle with an electrified rear axle the transmittable regenerative torque decreases with increasing deceleration.
The electric power of the battery also has a major influence on the utilization of recuperation since it is the limiting element for absorbing electrical energy from the vehicle movement. The maximum possible purely recuperative deceleration increases with increasing energy accumulator power. For directional stability reasons, however, a large generator braking torque can only be transmitted on the front axle.
Influence on driving dynamics  control Since the regenerative brake system influences braking stability, the driving dynamics control must be adapted to the changed physics of driving. It is expedient to suppress the regenerative component of braking when unstable driving states or excessively high brake slip are detected and to realize deceleration and stabilization interventions solely by means of the friction braking system. Otherwise instabilities and drivetrain vibrations could disrupt optimum wheel slip control.
In relation to partial braking operations interventions by the vehicle stabilization system are so rare that the suppression of recuperative braking in these situations has no noticeable impact on the average energy consumption for an electrified vehicle.
Thermal management for : electric vehicles Thermal management refers to the control of heat flows in a vehicle. The function of thermal management is to protect components against overheating, operate these components in their optimal temperature ranges, and generate pleasant temperatures for the occupants in the passenger compartment. The thermal management system switches into the appropriate operating modes in response to the heating or cooling demand of the components or the passenger compartment. The outside temperature is taken into consideration in the process. The correct configuration of thermal management is becoming ever more important and provides for increased range and comfort in electric vehicles.
Operating principle A thermal management system in an electric vehicle is generally more complex than in conventional vehicles with internal Internal combustion engines. Thus the e axle . Furthermore, the waste heat from an internal combustion engine is no longer available to heat the passenger compartment, and consequently energy efficient measures, e.g., a heat pump, are used for this purpose. The refrigerant circuit and cooling circuit must come together in optimal interaction to transfer the heat in the vehicle and to make available the necessary temperatures. The routing of the two circuits changes depending on the heating or cooling demand. This gives rise to different operating modes.
Cooling circuit Cooling circuit In the cooling circuit coolant is circulated by an electric coolant pump to deliver a coolant flow in line with demand. The coolant transfers heat from where it is generated to the point in the vehicle where it is needed. Coolant switching valves direct the coolant flow in the secondary cooling circuits of the drivetrain and in the heating circuits of the passenger compartment for this purpose. Thanks to the high specific heat capacity the coolant can absorb a lot of heat in a very small space, which is necessary for example to cool the e axle or the battery effectively.
Likewise, heat can be distributed very flexibly in the vehicle with the coolant. When coolant absorbs heat, its temperature increases and it must be cooled in a heat exchanger.
Refrigerant circuit is not pictured here. 1 Second electric drive , 4 Coolant pump, 5 Coolant pump, 6 Switching valve, 7 Switching valve, 8 Battery heater, 9 Connection to refrigerant circuit.
e machine Battery 4 5 Inverter DC/DC converter e machine Radiator 2 3 1 Chiller Inverter   6 7 8 9 9 Charger
Refrigerant circuit: Refrigerant circuit In the refrigerant circuit a refrigerant, which can be both liquid and gaseous, circulates. When the refrigerant evaporates can furthermore be used in the winter to heat the passenger compartment. The refrigerant circuit is driven by an electric air conditioning compressor, which compresses the refrigerant to the desired pressure so that evaporation and condensation take place at the desired temperature in each case.
Driving in the winter Driving in the winter At low outside temperatures both the passenger compartment and the battery must be heated in order to ensure full drive power at all times. The passenger compartment is heated by the refrigerant circuit by way of a heat pump. The battery is heated by an electric flow type heater and is additionally supported with waste heat from the e axle.
The use of a heat pump improves the efficiency of the passenger compartment heating, which has a positive effect on the range. The use of waste heat from the e axle to heat the battery both improves efficiency and ensures that the battery is fully available at all times.
Driving in the spring and fall Driving in the spring and fall At moderate outside temperatures the battery and e axle can be jointly cooled via a coolant circuit, whereby the waste heat is dissipated via the radiator to atmosphere. As a result, the energy consumption for thermal management is reduced to a minimum, which impacts positively on efficiency and range. At the same time the battery and e axle can be set to optimal temperature levels which enable the drive to operate at optimal efficiency.
Driving in the summer Driving in the summer At high outside temperatures the battery must be cooled via the "chiller" by the refrigerant circuit in order to guarantee the maximum permissible temperature in the battery and thereby ensure a long battery service life. The refrigerant circuit is likewise responsible for air conditioning the passenger compartment. The e axle is cooled separately from the battery via the radiator, facilitating unlimited, energy efficient cooling of the e axle.
Charging Charging As a rule limited charging capacity with alternating voltage is available at home or at the workplace for charging the battery. The charger, which is responsible for converting the alternating voltage into direct voltage, and the battery are jointly cooled via a cooling circuit and the radiator. In this way the charging losses can be kept as low as possible, which has a positive impact on the battery charging time.
During rapid charging at high outside temperatures the temperature in the battery increases very quickly. So as not to exceed the maximum permissible temperature and to enable the heat to dissipate in a short time, the battery is cooled via the "chiller" by the refrigerant circuit. This ensures a rapid charging process at all times.
Charging infrastructure for : electrified vehicles Facts Electrical energy today is very widely used, very reliably available, and in every home and business at that. It seems reasonable to charge electric vehicles from the already existing mains supply network as well.
Charging types The charger can be accommodated in the vehicle .
Alternatively the charger can also be accommodated in the infrastructure, for example in the charging post. In this case the process involves direct current charging because the vehicle is supplied with direct current. It must still be borne in mind that vehicles cannot be connected to any direct current sources because the charger is not just a rectifier.
Both charging types have their justifications. The charger carried in the vehicle can be connected virtually anywhere to existing alternating current networks, but is generally limited in its charging capacity by installation space, weight, and costs. Furthermore, large capacities are only sensible to a limited extent in that larger capacities cannot be drawn from the mains supply network everywhere.
When the charger is integrated in the infrastructure, this opens up the possibility of very high charging capacities because as a rule weight and installation space are less critical than in the vehicle itself. Sometimes the increased costs can be apportioned to a number of vehicles which use this charger one after the other. But the costs do not grow linearly with the capacity of the charger because upstream components of the mains supply network must "grow alongside". Apportioning the additional costs for high charging capacities will accordingly always mean an increased price per energy , which must ultimately be billed.
A further additional expense associated with direct current charging is appropriate signal transmission in that only the vehicle knows the battery condition precisely and consequently must control the charger in the infrastructure. Despite the expense, direct current charging is today the method of choice for realizing very high charging capacities.
Orders of magnitude To convey the orders of magnitude of the electrical engineering of vehicles, there follow some figures which are compared with households .
Vehicle Vehicle As at 2020 figures of 13 kWh through 27 kWh per 100 km and additionally in contrast
to internal combustion engines clearly : weather dependent. Heating mean a marked increased demand with regard to electric vehicles. 20 kWh per 100 km can be envisaged as an average. The other way round, this means: the driver can drive 5 km on 1 kWh of electrical energy. This figure may change somewhat over the years because the current trend is towards designing economical vehicles because economy with restricted battery capacity means increased range.
In the future larger and more cost effective batteries as well as more luxurious vehicles can presumably be envisaged. Assuming that an average passenger car covers 10,000 km per year , a vehicle with the above mentioned average value estimated over a year requires approximately 2,000 kWh.
the annual mileage of passenger cars. In other words, in terms of energy a passenger car is to be considered as a small household.
Charging capacity The sizes of the batteries used in vehicles cover a considerable range. The cause is a certain dilemma in the vehicle design because the weight and costs of the batteries are very high and can also make up a significant proportion of the weight and costs of the complete vehicle. In battery powered electric vehicles battery capacities of 16 kWh may be given by way of example. The amount of energy that is charged to the vehicle in a single charging process is smaller. How much smaller depends very much on the user because the battery can be recharged for any partial states of charge and is not necessarily fully charged. Which charging capacity is required to recharge the mentioned energy also depends on the desired charging time.
Plug connectors There are very many different socket outlets used in public mains supply networks. This is not only due to national market variants, but also due to their purpose and power capacity. The difference between domestic socket outlet is mentioned by way of example. Continuous power of approximately 2.3 kW and short time power of 3.7 kW can be drawn from a domestic socket outlet. The figures can be lower due to other power consumers which are operated at the same time.
Continuous power of 3.7 kW to over 100 kW can be drawn from an industrial socket outlet . The types for 11 kW or 22 kW are very common.
To charge vehicles, a purely mechanical adaptation is conceivable but not sensible because the charging capacity would have to be designed for the weakest adaptable socket outlet. However, there is often the wish to utilize the available current source or use the maximum capacity of the charger in the vehicle.
For this reason specific plug connectors have been introduced for electric vehicles which contain, in addition to the contacts for the charging current, signal contacts which communicate to the vehicle the load capability of the current charging source.
Drivetrain of an electric : vehicle In an electric vehicle propulsion is provided by an electrical machine . The electrical energy required for this is stored in battery powered vehicles in the traction battery; in fuel cell vehicles the energy is continually generated in the fuel cell. Direct current is available in both cases. However, a three phase alternating current is required to operate the e machine. Direct current is converted to alternating current in the inverter.
These components must be activated in a coordinated fashion in order to convert the torque request input by the driver via the accelerator pedal into an e machine torque. The torque then provides the drive or decelerates the vehicle. All these operations are controlled in an electronic control unit called the VCU .
Vehicle control unit for electric vehicles Function The electronic control of electric vehicles  and the components for heating and cooling the cooling circuits in the vehicle are coordinated.
1 Electric final drive unit with integrated components: e machine, power electronics , 6 Charging socket, 7 On board charger, 8 12V battery.
air conditioning compressor) are likewise : featured and are activated and deactivated by the VCU. The DC/DC converter supplies the LV vehicle electrical system  with electrical energy. This vehicle electrical system contains the consumers such as for example the infotainment and further ECUs in the vehicle.
Functional system overview A VCU has many other subtasks aside from the primary tasks of implementing the driver command, coordinating the subsystems of the HV vehicle electrical system, and controlling the cooling circuits in the vehicle.
Torque Demand subsystem Torque Demand subsystem The driver issues a concrete driver command through the accelerator pedal position. The accelerator pedal position is converted into a setpoint value for the drive or deceleration torque.
HV High Voltage, LV Low Voltage , AC Alternating Current, DC Direct Current, ECU Electronic Control Unit.
tion requests a pedal position dependent acceleration. Acceleration and braking with the accelerator pedal can be controlled by means of this one pedal control.
The vehicle's driveability is influenced by selecting a driving profile Normal, Eco or Sport. In the Eco driving program a lower drive torque is requested with the same accelerator pedal position . More drive torque is requested when the Sport driving program is selected.
Aside from the direct torque input the driver can make an indirect torque input via the cruise control . This simplifies vehicle handling in certain situations, for example when parking.
Unlike vehicles with internal combustion engines, there is no idle speed in electric vehicles when the accelerator pedal is not pressed and the vehicle is stationary.
control for different driving programs 1 Eco driving program, 2 Normal driving program, 3 Sport driving program.
2 3 1 Torque request 0 5 10 Nm 5 10 15 10 % 15 % 20 % Recuperation Sailing/coasting Acceleration Accelerator pedal position 25 % 30 % 1 2 3
In vehicles of some manufacturers one : pedal control is used to bring about deceleration via the e machine but also activation of the mechanical friction brake. In some countries there are standards which provide for an activation of the stop lamps from a certain deceleration. Despite the possibility of activating the mechanical friction brake via one pedal control there is however still a brake pedal, which facilitates safe and direct activation of the friction brake.
A Path for first e axle, B Path for second e axle Driving mode Brake pedal Recuperation mode Creep Drivability filter Stability interventions Axle distribution max max min Limiter Wheeltorque distribution Limiter Transmission protection/ intervention Safeguarding direction of travel Desired e machine torque Limiter Vehicle speed controller Braking torque Top speed Vehicle motion Drivetrain Limp home Torque vectoring ESC...
cifically initiates brake interventions in : order to guarantee vehicle stability. In the Torque Structure subsystem the individual torque requests from the Torque Demand subsystem, the brake intervention by the ESC, and the request for purely generative deceleration by the regenerative braking system are coordinated. The functionality contains a filter for smoothing the torque request and thus for improving driveability and avoiding load reversals. The torque calculation takes into account the position of the selector lever and thus it is ensured that the vehicle moves in the forward direction in the "Drive" position and in the reverse direction in the "Reverse" position. No electrical torque is generated in the "Neutral" and "Park" selector lever positions .
Electrical Supply System subsystem Electrical Supply System subsystem A further task of the VCU is to coordinate the components of the HV vehicle electrical system. When the driver requests a vehicle drive ready state can be deactivated by the energy management where necessary.
Electric vehicles also have a 12V or 24V battery because this is needed during the first starting operation to check the HV system.
Thermal Management subsystem Thermal Management subsystem In the Thermal Management subsystem the VCU controls the components for heating and cooling the cooling circuits in the vehicle. Typically there is a cooling circuit for the drive, in which the e machine, the inverter, the DC/DC converter, and the charger are located. Depending on the temperatures of these components the VCU activates the coolant pump in the cooling circuit and this pump cools the specified components accordingly. The heat transferred to the coolant is dissipated via the radiator to atmosphere. In the event of a higher cooling demand the radiator fan is additionally activated. The aim is to protect the components against overheating.
The radiator fan can, depending on the installation location of the traction battery, also be used to cool the battery. In the case of a separate cooling circuit for the battery the VCU controls a second coolant pump for this cooling circuit. If the battery temperature is very low it activates the air conditioning compressor, which can lower the coolant temperature and with it also the battery temperature. This is necessary especially on hot days, at high loads during driving or when rapid charging because overheating the battery could shorten its service life. Vehicle Functions subsystem Vehicle Functions subsystem The VCU computes the remaining range that the vehicle can cover on the current battery charge. The computation is made on the basis of the available energy in the traction battery and the energy consumption in the vehicle. The remaining range is sent on the CAN bus to the display ECU so that the value can be seen by the driver in the display.
Further applications of the : VCU for electric vehicles Battery electric buses and commercial vehicles Battery electric buses and commercial vehicles can be used for passenger transportation and goods deliveries in urban environments. The operating principle of the VCU in these applications is very similar to those for passenger cars.
Range extender operation There are electric vehicles which are equipped with an internal combustion engine that operates as a range extender. An additional e machine is operated by the combustion engine and generates electrical energy in generator mode. The power figures of the combustion engine and the additional e machine are much smaller than the power of the electric driving motor. Because the combustion engine is mechanically independent of the drivetrain, it can operate in at an optimal operating point. The electric power generated in this way is stored in the traction battery or made available to the electric drive. As a result, the range of the electric vehicle is increased when compared with pure battery mode.
A fuel cell may also be used as a range extender instead of an internal combustion engine. The operating principle of the VCU is in this case very similar.
The engine control unit activates the range extender internal combustion engine by inputting variables for fuel injection and throttle valve position and requests a torque via the additional inverter, which activates the e machine operating in generator mode. The output regulator in the engine control unit computes the desired e machine speed and the desired torque. The inverter coordinates the operating mode and sets the desired values . The requested electric power can thus be made available.
VCU Vehicle coordinator Charging strategy f Desired electric power REX Status REX On/Off Current, voltage Fuel injection Throttle valve Desired torque and rotational speed Drivetrain Inverter Alternator Sparkignition engine
1 IC engine, 2 Clutch, 3 Electrical machine, 4 Power take up element, 5 Transmission,: 6 DC/DC converter, 7 Inverter, 8 Traction battery, 9 12 V battery. STH0014 3Y 1 2 5 7 8 3 6 4 9 990 Electrification of the drive Motivation A hybrid electric vehicle . The traction battery is based for the most part on lithium ion technology with voltage levels of 48 to 800 V.
Features Hybrid vehicles combine many benefits of both types of drive in the drivetrain. The extended ranges of an internal combustion engine and rapid refueling are combined with the high efficiency of an electrical machine also in urban environments at low driving speeds and with many stops at traffic lights.
The internal combustion engine and the electrical machine can appear in the drivetrain in a variety of drive structures. Here vehicle transmissions also play a role, mostly to provide the internal combustion engine with variable gear ratios for power conversion or to drive or decelerate the vehicle electrically. The electrical machine offers high torques at low engine speeds. It thus complements the internal combustion engine, whose torque only starts to increase at medium engine speeds. The electrical machine and the internal combustion engine contribute to vehicle motion to varying degrees, depending on the drive power demanded.
on CO2 emissions a) Increase in electrical system power Share or recuperated energy.
1 New European Driving Cycle are operated in the 12 V vehicle electrical system.
Start/stop function The average fuel consumption and thus the CO2 emissions can be reduced by switching off the internal combustion engine when this is not required for propulsion of the vehicle. The electrical energy required to supply the vehicle electrical system during this time is delivered by the battery.
The start/stop function switches the internal combustion engine off temporarily without the driver having to turn off the ignition switch . The engine is typically switched off when the vehicle is stationary or during constant driving if no energy is required. It is then restarted automatically as soon as the driver is ready to drive off, accelerate or brake.
Recuperation One measure for reducing fuel consumption is aimed at converting the vehicle's kinetic energy into electrical energy of the available kinetic energy can be recuperated and stored in the battery. Depending on the electrical system load and the vehicle, even more energy can be recuperated than is needed for the electrical system supply. In this case it is expedient to export this energy in the form of kinetic energy back to the crankshaft.
In the case of recuperation the electrical machine is used to convert kinetic energy into electrical energy. Braking operations are effected where possible not or at least not only by the friction torque of the service brake, but by a generative braking torque of the electrical machine .
Hybrid drive Autarkic hybrid Externally chargeable hybrid Start/stop system Mild hybrid Full hybrid Function Start/stop function Recuperation Hybrid driving Purely electric driving Charging from the  mains supply network
1 3 2 Hybrid drives 993 tion together. The assistance provided by the electrical machine makes it possible to operate the internal combustion engine by means of operating point optimization predominantly in the range of its best efficiency or in operating ranges in which only low pollutant emissions occur. Hybrid driving can be subdivided into generator and motor modes of the electrical machine. Generator mode Generator mode In generator mode the internal combustion engine is operated in such a way that it delivers a higher power output than is needed for the desired propulsion of the vehicle .
Purely electric driving In the case of purely electric driving the vehicle is driven solely via the electrical machine. For this operating mode the internal combustion engine is disengaged from the vehicle drive and switched off. With the electric drive the vehicle drives quietly, without local emissions and fuel efficiently on the energy from the battery .
a) Conventional system with starter,: b) System with belt driven starter generator. 1 IC engine, 2 Fuel tank, 3 Clutch, 4 Transmission, 5 Final drive unit, 6 Battery, 7 Start/stop capable starter, 8 Starter control, 9 12 V starter generator, 10 Power electronics.
Start/stop system Features Features A start/stop system, also called a micro hybrid, essentially equates to a conventional drive with internal combustion engine, alternator as electrical machine, starter, and starter battery. The power of the electrical machine is at approximately 3 kW not high enough to make a contribution to propulsion. Therefore it is not in the proper sense a hybrid drive.
This system implements the start/stop . During vehicle accelerations and at high load the alternator decreases its power depending on the battery charge state as far as possible by reducing the regulator voltage. In this way the load on the internal combustion engine caused by the alternator and the fuel consumption are reduced. The alternator supplies less electrical energy in this phase; the consumers draw the electrical energy from the battery.
This start/stop system requires battery management with a charge state sensor system . The amount of energy that can be recuperated is however limited in the 12 V vehicle electrical system.
Classic starter Classic starter The start/stop functionality can be achieved with a classic starter . Starters which are designed for a higher number of starting operations are used for this application. The battery must also be designed for this operation, exhibiting increased cycle stability.
This system offers a simple way of reducing fuel consumption with limited outlay. These system with start/stop functionality and recuperation can therefore now be found in many vehicle models.
Starter generator: Starter generator Starter generators combine the starter and the alternator the internal combustion engine.
Belt driven starter generator The belt driven starter generator is connected via a belt drive to the internal combustion engine . The layout is the same as that of a conventional alternator; this topology can also be found in a mild hybrid with 48 V vehicle electrical system. It can be easily integrated, with no changes to the drivetrain needed. Because, depending on the operating state, there is a slack strand or taut strand in the belt drive, mechanical adjustments are however required in the belt drive tensioning system. In the case of a belt driven starter generator the power transmittable by the belt determines the upper limit for the system power.
Starter generators which are connected via belts to the internal combustion engine were used in series production for the first time in 2004.
Integrated starter generator The integrated starter generator, also known as the crankshaft starter generator, is seated between the internal combustion engine and the transmission on the crankshaft. In the case of an integrated starter generator the transmittable power is limited by the starter generator's performance and its power electronics. The coaxial mounting of the starter generator on the crankshaft necessitates a lengthening of the drivetrain. Thus, integrating such a system in an existing vehicle concept entails an outlay on mechanical adjustments.
The crankshaft starter generator can demonstrate its advantages particularly with voltages of 42 V and upwards. A 42 V vehicle electrical system had been discussed for some time, but was not then introduced. Hence the crankshaft starter generator could not make the breakthrough in the 12 V vehicle electrical system in parallel to the belt driven starter generator. This concept is first implemented with the mild hybrids and the 48 V vehicle electrical system.
Advantages of a starter generator over  Advantages of a starter generator over  a classic starter a classic starter Starting operation A classic starter accelerates the internal combustion engine to around 250 rpm. At this speed fuel is injected in such a way that the engine automatically reaches idle speed. This operation, because of the starter pinion's meshing process and its rotation in the engine's flywheel, is accompanied by noises and vibrations. Because the starter generator is permanently connected to the crankshaft, these side effects occur much less frequently. The starter generator can also accelerate to higher rotational speeds; the first injection can thus take place at higher rotational speeds . This results in a quieter and faster starting operation. Start/stop system Because of the meshing process, a classic starter can only initiate the starting operation while the engine is stopped. This reduces the effectiveness of a start/stop system because the engine can only be restarted at zero speed. Therefore, with these start/stop systems, the engine can only be switched off when the vehicle is stationary. With a starter generator, on the other hand, the engine can already be switched off while it is coasting, which thanks to the longer engine standstill phases impacts positively on fuel consumption. A renewed starting operation can if necessary be initiated again even when the engine is turning.
7 1 2 5 6 3 4 UTH0100Y 996 Electrification of the drive Mild hybrid Features Features With a mild hybrid system the hybrid driving function can be implemented in addition to the functions of a start/stop system. An electrical machine assists the internal combustion engine here. As well as the 12 V battery, the mild hybrid contains a traction battery with a higher voltage level .
Integration in the drivetrain Integration in the drivetrain There are different ways of connecting the electrical machine in the drivetrain and to the engine. Figure 8 shows the connection of the electrical machine to the internal combustion engine via a belt drive. The electrical machine can be used in this hybrid vehicle instead of the alternator from the 12 V vehicle electrical system. The other widespread integration option is to arrange the electrical machine on the crankshaft between the internal combustion engine and the clutch or transmission. This arrangement facilitates the transmission ratio free connection of the electrical machine to the internal combustion engine. However, the additional component increases the length of the drivetrain. Depending on the hybrid vehicle power requirement, there are further integration options for one or if necessary more electrical machines . Full hybrid Features Features A full hybrid system can, in addition to the functions of a mild hybrid system, drive over shorter distances with the electrical machine alone. The internal combustion engine is disengaged during purely electric driving from the drivetrain by the power take up element or an interrupting clutch and switched off.
The traction battery can store energy during recuperation and with excess combustion engine power in the case of operating point shifts. The voltage level of the traction batteries in a full hybrid are typically up to 400 V and for high power requirements up to 800 V. However, the capacities of the traction batteries used are not sufficient to facilitate purely electric driving over longer distances. But the electric drive in a full hybrid can increase the efficiency of the internal combustion engine.
The Toyota Prius was the first full hybrid vehicle to be a volume production model in 1997. Since then further vehicle models have been brought onto the market as full hybrids.
Integration in the drivetrain: Integration in the drivetrain A full hybrid vehicle uses both an internal combustion engine and at least one electrical machine as the means of propulsion. There are in this respect a multitude of drive structures which partly pursue different optimization objectives and which utilize to differing extents electrical energy to drive the vehicle .
Electrical machine Electrical machine Permanent field synchronous machines  with full hybrid vehicles.
Vehicle electrical systems Vehicle electrical systems Full hybrids have an HV with a battery is connected via a DC/DC converter to the HV vehicle electrical system. The battery in the low voltage electrical system is charged via the DC/DC converter; the alternator in the conventional vehicle electrical system is not required here.
torques at low rotational speeds. In this way, it ideally supplements the internal combustion engine, whose torque only starts to increase at mid range rotational speeds.
drive makes it possible to operate the internal combustion engine with a higher geared transmission with identical mileages predominantly in the range of its best efficiency or in ranges in which only low pollutant emissions occur. Operating point optimization occurs.
electrical machine, it is possible when braking as compared to a mild hybrid to convert a much greater part of the vehicle's kinetic energy into electrical energy . The electrical energy is stored in the energy storage device and can be used at a later stage to drive the vehicle.
Externally chargeable hybrids: Plug in hybrid Plug in hybrid Features An extension of the full hybrid system is the plug in hybrid, whose traction battery can be charged not only internally but also from the mains supply network i.e., externally. As a result, the journey can be started with a fully charged traction battery. Electrical machine The electrical machine in a plug in hybrid is the same as the in a full hybrid.
Traction battery The traction battery for plug in hybrids as a rule has a larger capacity without the internal combustion engine cut in. The decisive factor here is that a plug in hybrid with a fully charged traction battery can be started and driven purely electrically over predominantly short distances.
Range extender Range extender Features The range of an electrical vehicle on one battery charge is currently still much lower than that of a vehicle with an internal combustion engine. An added complication is that the charging process is very time consuming, making it difficult to use an electric vehicle for longer distances. Range extenders denote additional assemblies in an electric vehicle which extend the range limited by the restricted battery capacity. Internal combustion engines with limited power for example are used for this purpose. These vehicles are designed as electric vehicles; the power of the electrical machine and the capacity of the traction battery correspond to those of an electric vehicle. The traction battery is charged from the public mains supply network, e.g., at a charging post. The range extender enables the vehicle to continue to be driven with a flat battery to the next charging facility.
Parallel hybrid Topologies Topologies In a parallel hybrid drive both the internal combustion engine and the electrical machine influence the vehicle drive simultaneously . The electrical machine of the parallel hybrid drive can basically be positioned at different points in the drivetrain, which brings with it specific advantages and disadvantages. A nomenclature originally defined by Daimler AG has gained acceptance for designation purposes; this system designates the parallel hybrid drivetrain based on the position of the electrical machine in the drivetrain as P0 through P4. The P here stands for the parallel architecture, while the number denotes the installation location of the electrical machine in the drivetrain.
trical machine for the different topologies using the example of a standard drive. An external charging socket can be installed but is not pictured here. This also applies to the front transverse drive.
hybrid architecture with various arrangements of the electrical machine in a standard drive a) P0, battery and electrical machine mostly 48 V, b) P1, c) P2, d) P3, e) P4 , 7 Interrupting clutch.
Features of the parallel hybrid Features of the parallel hybrid In parallel hybrid drives the internal combustion engine and one or more electrical machines independently of each other or jointly contribute to propelling the vehicle in conjunction with internal combustion engine and transmissions specially developed for hybrid drives with integrated electrical machines with different power stages.
The extent of development and installation work for parallel drive structures is lower when compared with series and power split structures, in that for the most part only one electrical machine with lower electric power is required and the adaptations necessary in converting a conventional drivetrain are fewer.
1 IC engine, 2 Fuel tank, 3 Electrical machine, 4 Clutch, 5 Transmission, 6 Final drive unit, 7 Pulse controlled inverter, 8 Battery. STH0023 3Y a 2 8 7 1 5 6 3 4 b 6 8 7 1 2 3 1000 Electrification of the drive P0 topology P0 topology The electrical machine is permanently connected via a belt drive to the internal combustion engine . The electrical machine can with this topology perform the conventional alternator function even when the vehicle is at a standstill and thereby reliably supply the vehicle electrical system. On the proviso that the electrical machine has a suitably compact design and no additional water cooling is required, mounting the electrical machine in the original alternator position entails only minimal additional integration outlay, since the alternator installation space can be utilized. However, the belt tensioner must be adapted to the different operating states in which taut strand or slack strand occurs.
Because the electrical machine is connected to the internal combustion engine, the engaged internal combustion engine reduces the energy to be recuperated when decelerating.
The power output of the electrical machine connected via a belt drive to the internal combustion engine is typically approximately 10 kW. Consequently, only a mild hybrid can be realized with the P0 topology. The CO2 savings potential is thus also limited due to the electrical machine's restricted power output.
At an operating voltage < 60 V there is no need for the costly measures to comply with the contact protection stipulations. P1 topology P1 topology In the P1 topology , the loss affected belt drive is omitted, consequently increasing the mechanical efficiency. Furthermore, when compared with a belt driven electrical machine, a more powerful electrical machine can be used because the power transmittable via the belt is lower. In contrast to series and power split drive structures, the speed of the internal combustion engine is permanently coupled to the speed of the electrical machine. In vehicle deceleration phases the internal combustion engine cannot be decoupled from the electrical machine and is therefore always engaged. In the process the drag torque of the internal combustion engine reduces the energy to be recuperated during deceleration. The CO2 savings potential is thereby limited.
Purely electric driving is not possible with this drive structure. The electric drive can be used to assist the internal combustion engine and thereby improve dy 
1 IC engine, 2 Fuel tank, 3 Electrical machine, 4 Clutch or converter , 5 Transmission, 6 Final drive unit, 7 Pulse controlled inverter, 8 Battery. SAF0093 2Y a 2 5 6 8 7 1 3 4 4 2 6 b 8 7 1 3 Hybrid drives 1001 namic performance. The P1 topology is therefore only suitable for a mild hybrid. The power output of the electrical machine connected via a belt drive to the internal combustion engine is typically approximately 10 kW. Values of around 20 kW are typical for an electrical machine integrated on the crankshaft.
The outlay on integrating the electrical machine in the drivetrain is higher here than for the P0 topology with belt drive. The P1 topology is possible with all transmission variants.
P2 topology P2 topology If a clutch is installed between the internal combustion engine and the electrical machine which allows the engine to be cut in and out and thus decoupled from the electrical machine , purely electric driving with a full hybrid is made possible. The internal combustion engine can also be decoupled in deceleration phases. Firstly, this increases the energy to be recuperated during acceleration. Secondly, it permits sailing operation, whereby the vehicle rolls freely and is slowed down only by aerodynamic drag and rolling friction. However, engine starting can only take place with the clutch closed, which hampers the transition from electric driving to driving with the internal combustion engine, above all without a clutch between the electrical machine and the transmission.
To make this drive structure acceptable, it is very important to enable the internal combustion engine to be started from electric driving without compromising comfort. There are two different ways of achieving this. In the first option the internal combustion engine is started when the interrupting clutch is open by a separate starter and there is no unwanted effect on vehicle motion. This however calls for a separate starter, which can actually be dispensed with in a hybrid vehicle. Another option is to activate the internal combustion engine, the electric drive and the clutch in such a way that the effect on vehicle motion is compensated for during engine starting. To this end an intelligent control system requires access to measured values from the internal combustion engine, the electric drive, and the clutch located in between. The clutch must be able to adapt automatically to the changing conditions in ongoing operation and to follow the control system inputs. The additional moment of inertia acting via the transmission input shaft must be taken into account in the design of the synchronizer rings. Reliable generator operation via the internal combustion engine is interrupted when the clutch is open.
UTH0044Y 1002 Electrification of the drive transmission housing are required. Installation space is additionally required for the electrical machine and the clutch. The P2 topology is possible with all transmission variants.
P3 topology P3 topology Connecting the electrical machine to the transmission outlet is also feasible. This topology is possible with all transmission types.
However, in this topology the rotational speed spread of the drive axle must be transmitted to the machine shaft. Electric driving can only be achieved by choosing a suitable conversion ratio between the electrical machine and the drive shaft. If, at higher driving speeds, this results in the upper rotational speed limit of the electrical machine being exceeded. the electrical machine must be automatic disengaged.
In principle, this topology offers the greatest efficiency during recuperation since the lowest mechanical transmission losses occur here. But this only applies provided the electrical machine power output does not decrease substantially with the speed. Otherwise the maximum possible recuperation or boost power would drop prematurely with the driving speed. If the electrical machine has be to disengaged due to its rotational speed limit at higher driving speeds, energy cannot be recuperated in these high rotational speed ranges. The internal combustion engine cannot be started from a vehicle standstill. As well as the additionally required conventional alternator for reliable electrical system supply this topology must have a conventional start/stop capable starter or a 12 V or 48 V based starter generator.
The integration outlay for the electrical machine must here too be gaged as very high. Furthermore, installing the additional clutch between the internal combustion engine and the electrical machine in this P3 topology entails increasing the length of the drivetrain and thus necessitating a larger installation space.
P4 topology P4 topology A further parallel drive structure is obtained by electrifying a separate axle . Here, a conventional drivetrain comprising internal combustion engine and transmission on a powered axle is combined with an electrically powered axle. A semi automatic transmission and a start/stop system for the internal combustion engine are required for this purpose. One or more interrupting clutches can be installed.
This drive structure is classed as a parallel hybrid drive because the individual components of power from the engine and the electric drive add up. This concept delivers a four wheel drive functionality limited by the power of the electrical machine and battery charge. Distribution of the drive torques can be adjusted by specific activation of the electric drive within wide limits.
The traction battery is recharged by regenerative braking or externally via a charging socket. The traction battery can only be recharged externally when the vehicle is stationary.
The transmission for the internal combustion engine is the same as that of a vehicle without axle hybrid, but must also be able to be operated over longer distances at high speed in neutral i.e., open. Lu 
1 IC engine, 2 Fuel tank, 3 Electrical machines, 4 Final drive unit, 5 Pulse controlled inverter, 6 Battery. a b 1 4 3 3 6 5 2 1 4 3 3 2 6 5 SAF0092 2Y Hybrid drives 1003 brication of the transmission must be assured when both the input shaft and the output shaft are stationary.
Final drive via an axle Particularly for front transverse drives with very limited installation space it can be advantageous not to have to accommodate the electrical machine between the engine and the transmission. A P0 or P1 position by means of a belt drive is just as conceivable as a P4 position on the axle driven by the internal combustion engine. The downside of this concept is that the electrical machine may not be able to utilize the different gears of the combustion engine transmission and is subject to losses at high driving speeds as long as it cannot be disengaged from the final drive differential and the wheels.
Series hybrid In a series hybrid drive there is no mechanical connection of the internal combustion engine to the vehicle drive. The internal combustion engine drives an electrical machine, which operates as an alternator . The electric power generated in this way is made available together with the battery power to a second electrical machine, which drives the vehicle. From the perspective of the energy flows, a series connection exists in this case.
Advantages of the series hybrid Advantages of the series hybrid In view of the fact that there is no mechanical connection between the internal combustion engine and the powered wheels
STH0022 4Y a b 2 1 5 3 4 3 7 6 1 5 2 7 6 3 1004 Electrification of the drive in the series hybrid, this drive structure offers some advantages. Thus, a conventional range transmission is not required in the drivetrain. This creates free space for arranging the overall drive . In addition, starting the internal combustion engine from electric driving does not cause any unwanted effect on vehicle motion.
The chief advantage when driving is the ability to freely select the operating point of the engine. Excess mechanical energy produced by the internal combustion engine at full load with high efficiency which is not required for vehicle propulsion can be stored in the battery and then utilized later when the combustion engine is turned off for the electric drive. This supports fuel saving and low emission operational management of the vehicle. The engine can also be optimized to a limited operating range.
With a larger battery capacity the electrical machine operated as an alternator and the internal combustion engine can be designed with smaller dimensions. The combustion engine can be maintained at more favorable operating points; it only makes available the average energy required for vehicle propulsion for the base load. The missing power for acceleration processes for example is drawn from the battery.
Disadvantages of the series hybrid Disadvantages of the series hybrid A downside of the series hybrid is that electrical energy has to be converted twice. The losses incurred through double energy conversion are higher than in the case of a purely mechanical transfer by a transmission. Furthermore, this principle lacks the possibility of adding the power of the internal combustion engine to that of the electrical machine .
Standing against the high driving comfort provided by the electrical machine without ratio change and the possibility of operating the internal combustion engine at its optimum consumption point is the high complexity in the form of two electrical machines. These, due to their very concept, have to be very powerful since the entire energy of the internal combustion engine must be converted. This means greater weight and higher costs. Due to the double energy conversion, the series hybrid is only fuel efficient under certain operating conditions. At low and medium speeds a series hybrid, despite the higher losses, offers a fuel consumption advantage because here the positives afforded by the ability to freely select the engine's operating point outweigh the negatives. The higher losses are predominant at higher speeds.
a 2 6 4 5 1 4 3 b 6 4 5 1 2 4 3 Hybrid drives 1005 Series parallel hybrid A series hybrid is extended to become a series parallel hybrid by establishing a mechanical connection between the two electrical machines which is connected or separated by a clutch. The series parallel hybrid can utilize the advantages of the series hybrid at low speeds and circumvent the disadvantages at higher speeds by closing the clutch. When the clutch is closed, the series parallel hybrid behaves like a parallel hybrid. Since the double energy conversion is limited to the range of lower speeds and power outputs, smaller electrical machines are sufficient for the series parallel hybrid than are required for the series hybrid.
Compared with the series hybrid, the advantage in "packaging" is lessened on account of the mechanical connection between the internal combustion engine and the powered wheels. Compared with the parallel hybrid, two electrical machines are required for the same task. Power split hybrid Features Features A power split hybrid drive generally has two electrical machines, which on the one hand function as electric variators and on the other hand perform "hybrid" functions such as boosting and recuperation. Power split hybrid vehicles combine features of parallel and series hybrid vehicles with those of a power split . The electric power is supplied via an inverter to the second electrical machine, which functions as a motor at a speed independent of both the generator and the internal combustion engine and supplies its power to the drivetrain again in mechanical form.
Power split Power split The central element of power split and the output. For the output power split the internal combustion engine and the generator engage an element of the planetary gear set and
the second electrical machine engages : a second element of the planetary gear set, while the output is connected to the third element of the planetary gear set. In both cases the electric component in the power split hybrid can be varied by activation of the electrical machine. This provides for continuously variable starting and continuously variable ratio adjustment. The battery can be charged or discharged by varying the generated and supplied electrical energy of the two electrical machines.
Because of the kinematic boundary conditions at the planetary gear set, the engine speed can be adjusted within certain limits independently of the driving speed. The internal combustion engine can thus operate extensively in the optimal operating range. Following a continuously variable transmission . Some of the engine power is transmitted by the planetary gear set via the mechanical path to the powered wheels. The remainder of the power is transmitted via the electrical path with double energy conversion to the powered wheels. Similarly to the series hybrid, the electric transmission path can be used in the case of low power demands. For higher power demands, the mechanical transmission path is also available. However, it is not possible to switch arbitrarily between the mechanical and electrical transmission paths. Depending on the configuration of the planetary gear set, the electrical machine and the internal combustion engine, without an additional transmission only certain combinations between the mechanical and electrical transmission paths are ever possible. In this way, the power split hybrid can achieve substantial fuel savings at low and medium speeds. No additional fuel savings can be achieved at high speeds.
The power split hybrid can be expand by mechanical, fixed gears by using a second planetary gear set. The mechanical complexity increases, while the electrical complexity decreases. Smaller electrical machines are then sufficient for a comparable concept. Furthermore, fuel consumption at medium and higher speeds can be improved.
Disadvantages Disadvantages Standing against the high driving comfort of this concept is the high complexity in the form of two electrical machines, which due to their very concept have to be very powerful as they must convert a large proportion of the power. Their overall power is thus in the range of the installed combustion engine power. There is no provision for modularity with an existing basic transmission without electrical machines.
on a conventional automatic planetary transmission for a standard drive 1 From driving engine, 2 Torsion damper, 3 Electrical machine, 4 Multi disk brakes, 5 Planetary gear sets, 6 Multi disk clutches, 7 To final drive unit.
Hybrid drives 1007 Incorporating the transmission in the hybrid drive Transmissions for P0 and  P1 topologies Hybrid drives come in the most varied forms. For P0 and P1 topologies, where the electrical machine is located between the internal combustion engine and the clutch or converter, the classic drivetrain components can be used. The required changes in the drivetrain for the hybrid drive are minimal; no changes to the transmission itself are required. All transmission types can be used.
Adapted conventional transmissions Conventional transmissions adapted to hybrid functionality are prevalent in vehicles with P2 topology hybrid drive. These vehicles are based on the variant of classic drive with internal combustion engine; the classic drive components can be used for the most part. The function of the automatic transmission is the same as that of a conventional drive.
transmission for the standard drive in whose housing an electrical machine is integrated at the drive end . With these transmissions it is possible to achieve a modular, gradual electrification of the drivetrain ranging from the mild hybrid, through the full hybrid up to the plug in hybrid. This transmission with integrated electrical machine is only slightly longer than a conventional transmission. The extended length even fits into the same outer transmission case on frequent occasions. This simplifies the vehicle platform. Transmissions with integrated electrical machine In some vehicles the installation space required for the P3 drive configuration is not available. This problem can be remedied by integrating the electrical machine in a dual clutch transmission. The electrical machine is no longer connected to the crankshaft of the internal combustion en 
gine, but is instead connected to a subunit : of the dual clutch transmission. This arrangement does not require an additional clutch between the internal combustion engine and the electrical machine. Purely electric driving with the engine stopped is possible by opening the double clutch of the transmission. Depending on the gear selected in the transmission subunit, with the electrical machine a different transmission ratio is possible between the engine and the electrical machine. This produces an additional degree of freedom for the hybrid control, which can be used to further reduce fuel consumption.
Special transmissions  for hybrid drives Specially developed hybrid vehicles which are only offered as hybrid variants arrive on the market in high numbers. Here it is practical to adapt the entire drivetrain to the hybrid drive possibilities and thereby optimize the complete system. One measure is to simplify the mechanical design of the transmission by omitting the components for the reverse gear. Instead, at least one electrical machine is integrated into the transmission to provide for reversing . The electrical machine is thus part of the transmission, whereby the connection to the transmission can be effected by various transmission shafts. The transmission can be further simplified by reducing the gears. Tight stepping of the gears as encountered in a classic drive is not necessary in a hybrid drive.
Transmissions specifically developed for a hybrid drive with one or more integrated electrical machines called dedicated hybrid transmissions .
1 IC engine, 2 Electric final drive unit  and reduction gear, 3 Traction battery, 4 12V battery for 12V vehicle electrical system, 5 Control units, 6 Regenerative  braking system.
stop operation of the internal combustion : engine. The operating strategy determines how the drive power is shared between the engine and the electric drive. It decides the extent to which the potentials for fuel saving and for reducing the emissions of a vehicle are utilized.
Selection of and switching between the individual states is performed in accordance with numerous conditions relating to, for example, the accelerator pedal position, the state of charge of the battery, and the vehicle's current speed. The components in the hybrid vehicle behave differently, depending on the optimization objective .
HV High Voltage, LV Low Voltage , TCU Transmission Control Unit, ECU Engine Control Unit.
Terminals Fuse Engine Start Stop M 3~ Transmission control TCU e clutch Internalcombustion engine El. machine El. machine On Off ECU Engine management Charging post
Drivetrain operating strategy : for hybrid vehicles Function In a hybrid vehicle with internal combustion engine and electrical machine the interaction of these two drives must be coordinated. This drivetrain operating strategy is part of the software in the VCU , which controls the degrees of freedom of the interaction of the drives in such a way as to minimize the overall drive system losses over the route.
The overall wheel torque requested . The purpose of the optimization strategy is to delivery this overall torque with the best possible distribution between the internal combustion engine and one or more electrical machines. The strategy must furthermore decide whether it is more favorable to drive by hybrid or purely electric means if purely electric driving is possible for the given hybrid vehicle topology.
typical fuzzy logic strategies the continuous data are classified into discrete value ranges. Both strategies have a series of predefined rules without the remaining route being known from the outset.
Optimization based operating strategy Optimization based operating strategy Optimization based strategies can be either offline or online approaches. In the case of offline approaches optimization is performed offline; the results are then stored in the VCU for example in program maps. Dynamic programming .
Influences on operating strategy : The description of a drivetrain operating strategy applies here generally to all hybrid topologies. The concept of an operating strategy is explained with reference to a P2 parallel hybrid .
Values with the same specific fuel consumption , and battery and taking into account the relevance of the instantaneous driver command torque in relation to the energy requirement for the entire journey give rise to a complex optimization problem.
Engine torque 0 % 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 rpm Engine speed 20 40 60 80 220 210 210 230 240 250 1 2 Torque % 0 500 1000 1500 rpm Speed 0 20 40 60 80 20 40 60 80 100 Torque limits Efficiency in % 85 85 93 93 95 95 85 85
Equivalent consumption minimization : strategy A method for solving the previously explained problem is an equivalent consumption minimization strategy , and the battery.
The idea behind the ECMS is to find a way to compare the power delivered by the internal combustion engine with the power of the electric system. This is achieved by using an equivalence factor s comprising several aspects for optimizing the torque distribution between engines. The equivalence factor will be described in detail later.
The power requested by the driver PD is the sum total of the mechanical power of the internal combustion engine PICE and that of the electrical machine PEM.
PEM for the operating points at which the losses are minimized are determined by an optimization algorithm which evaluates a multitude of PICE and PEM combinations and stores the combination for which PEq assumes the lowest value.
example of an ECMS optimization. The minimum equivalence power constitutes here the optimal torque distribution based on the cost function. Figure 6a shows the equivalence power for the hybrid drive in kW with a lower SOC becomes clear in Figure 6a. The equivalence power for electric driving at which the driver's overall torque request is effected via the electrical machine and the internal combustion engine is isolated and switched off is also shown in Figure 6a for two SOC values. At the higher SOC value for this combination of driver requested torque and drivetrain speed the equivalence power for electric driving is lower than the best possible torque distribution for hybrid driving.
the equivalence power levels for hybrid drive and electrical machine torque at an internal combustion engine and electrical machine torque of 3000 rpm and a total torque demand of 400 Nm.
between the power from the battery and : the fuel. The equivalence factor is typically subdivided into two parts: a constant s0 and an SOC based correction. The s0 component depends on the future speed and the load profile of the vehicle. Because this information can only be estimated, a correction of s0 is made based on the deviation between the desired and the actual SOC of the battery. This also serves to maintain the SOC in a range so that charging or discharging is always possible where required. Figure 7 shows a potential realization of the behavior .
Selection of the optimal operating mode Selection of the optimal operating mode As already mentioned, the strategy must select which operating mode hybrid or purely electric driving is optimal. To find the best solution, the equivalence power with the best power distribution in the hybrid driving mode is compared with the equivalence power in the electric driving mode. The prerequisite for this is that the driver request can be completely fulfilled by the electrical machine and the internal combustion engine has no losses because it is isolated and switched off. The mode in which the lowest equivalent overall power can be achieved is then selected as the optimal energy mode.
for some exemplary operating conditions for a P2 hybrid vehicle  Transition from electric to hybrid driving, speed 3000 rpm, overall driver command 400 Nm.
the dependence of equivalence factor s  as a function of state of charge 1 Example of the SOC end value for a   driving cycle.
Map based strategies: A common type of control based strategy is a map based strategy. In this approach, the optimal torque distribution for example from program maps can be determined on the basis of driving conditions. The program maps which are to be selected to determine the torque distribution are determined on the basis of a set of rules which are dependent on system properties such as for example SOC classification .
implementer when calibrating the data .
required because the decision as to which program maps are to be used and calling up the desired value from the program maps take place only once per optimization time step.
age, some series solutions have more than 100 calibration curves and maps to cover all the combinations of relevant input parameters adequately.
bration from one vehicle model to another because the calibration of the individual curves and maps is based not on the physical properties of the individual components but on the combined effects of all the components in the system. In comparison, an ECMS calibration typically consist primarily of program maps that show the loss characteristics of the internal combustion engine, the electrical machine and the battery individually.
in the environmental conditions. Depending on the implementation an ECMS can adapt online if the equivalence factor changes on account of a long term deviation between the desired and the actual battery SOC.
On the basis of these advantages and disadvantages both equivalent consumption minimization strategies and mapbased strategies are used by a number of vehicle manufacturers.
A neural network is adapted by a training process in which a lot of data are used with combinations of inputs to the neural network and resulting "correct" outputs. The training process adapts the weights in the neural network to be able to depict all the training data in the best possible way .
Furthermore, progress is being made in the field of neural networks and their use in recognizing situations and trends and in solving optimization with appropriate accuracy. Generally speaking, data based processes like neural networks have the reputation of imposing high demands on computing capacity and data storage.
electric driving mode assuming that the driver's torque request is completely fulfilled by the electrical machine .
As shown in Figure 8, the network inputs are the power requested by the driver , the speed n of the internal combustion engine and the electrical machine, and the equivalence factor s.
1 Neurons, 2 Connections , 3 Neurons for expansion to a plastic neural network. PD Mechanical power requested by the driver, n Speed of internal combustion engine and electrical machine, s Equivalence factor, PH_O Optimal mechanical power of the electrical machine in the hybrid driving mode, PH_E Equivalent overall power in the hybrid driving mode with optimal power distribution, PE_E Equivalent overall power with optimization of the costs of purely electric driving. SAE1346 1Y PH_O PH_E PE_E PD 2 2 2 3 1 1 1 1 n s
is depicted by combinations of PD, n and s. : The resulting data records were then fed into an ECMS model which was already calibrated for the target vehicle in order to supply the "correct" answers for training the neural network. In addition, test cases were created for the neural network using international driving cycles in order to represent real driving situations.
Use of Use of plasticity in an  plasticity in an  NN based HEV operating strategy NN based HEV operating strategy Networks with the ability to remember and to learn from experienced have garnered a lot of attention in the last few years. A promising form of network was published in .
The results are shown in Figure 9. Figure 9a shows the direct comparison of the resulting optimal mechanical power of the electrical machine over time. Figure 9b shows the results when the mechanical NN power is converted into an equivalent power and compared with the equivalence power from the basic ECMS result. There is no discernible difference here between the NN result and the ECMS.
results for the optimal mechanical power of the electrical machine deviate from those of the ECMS result the deviation with regard to energy consumption makes no difference. This is useful because under certain conditions a large difference in the power or torque distribution can only have a very small influence on the overall energy consumption.
The neural network was able to deliver results comparable with an ECMS approach with regard to global efficiency while is demonstrated much fewer computation steps than the ECMS and much fewer data storage requirements than a map based strategy. The addition of the plasticity terms also reduced the overall system error while the advantages with regard to storage capacity and computing time were retained .
hybrid driving mode from ECMS . SAE1347 2E
 K. Hauer, J. Girard: Energy Management of Hybrid Electric Vehicles Based on Plastic Neural Networks. Submitted for publication, International Journal of Powertrains .
 A. Panday, H. O. Bansal: A review of optimal energy management strategies for hybrid electric vehicle. International Journal of Vehicular Technology, Vol. 2014, Hindawi.
https://www.dbai.tuwien.ac.at/education/ AIKonzepte/Folien/NeuronaleNetze.pdf .
The electric final drive unit .
Thanks to the functional integration of power electronics, electrical machine and transmission, the complexity can be significantly reduced in contrast to three separate components.
Functional component integration Functions of components The power electronics, also known as an inverter, is required to generate from the direct voltage of the vehicle's traction battery via the resulting direct current for the electrical machine. A rotating field and with it a torque is generated in the electrical machine with the aid of this 3 phase alternating current.
The mounted transmission serves to transmit the torque for the vehicle drive. A two stage spur gear drive is usually used. The transmission has a fixed step down ratio between 8 and 13 and a differential for compensating different wheel speeds, e.g., when cornering. Multi speed solutions may also be used as an alternative to the solution with a fixed step down ratio. Continuously variable transmissions  are also possible.
1 Power electronics  , 7 Mechanical connecting points.
Manual transmissions with up to four gears : are also used in the commercial vehicle sector with the aim of providing a high starting torque for the acceleration process and an operating point with optimum efficiency at constant speed.
By converting the electrical energy, the power electronics also regulates the entire electric drive to the required setpoint torque and monitors the components for safe operation, e.g., by measuring the critical component temperatures and further system limit values.
The design and the function of the power electronics and the electrical machine are described in detail elsewhere .
Construction The electrical machine and the transmission are permanently joined to each other at the housing end via a common end plate . To transmit the torque the electrical machine's rotor shaft is connected with the transmission input shaft, usually via a spline.
Alternatively, the rotor and the transmission can also be connected with each other via a common uninterrupted shaft, this arrangement often being used in smaller performance classes  or oil cooled electrical machines.
The end face pointing towards the transmission is also called the A bearing side and the face pointing away from the transmission the B bearing side.
The power electronics is integrated in the unit comprising electrical machine and transmission. The electrical connection between the power electronics and the electrical machine is established at the end pointing away from the transmission . The conductor bars have flexible elements that guarantee the compensation of tolerances during installation and operation. The conductor bars are usually connected via screwed crimped or welded joints, where for reasons of easy exchangeability and maintenance of the components detachable connections are preferred. The modularity in the e axle design thereby achieved also enables the three components to be freely combined and configured, thus allowing the drive system to be individually adapted to the vehicle requirements.
Thermal layout Thanks to the integration of the three components in a single drive system the e axle's cooling system can be specifically matched and optimized to the system requirements. The e axle is connected to the vehicle cooling circuit. The coolant is as a rule routed through the e axle serially . Consequently the heat loss from these components is dissipated in the best possible way.
Cooling of the electrical machine Cooling of the electrical machine The electrical machine can be cooled by the coolant in a water jacket or directly by the transmission oil by means of heat exchanger. When coolant is used, this is directed through channels in the housing jacket . This solution is therefore also known as water jacket cooling.
there may also be used. In this case, the : electrical machine and the transmission share a common oil circuit with the oil routed directly into the inside of the machine and consequently also reaching the winding. Because the oil use is electrically non conductive, it can be routed specifically to the electrical machine's heat sources. As a result, despite having a generally poorer cooling effect and higher viscosity, it delivers the necessary heat dissipation. The oil is supplied to the rotor via the rotor shaft and to the stator via grooves and channels. In this case, the arrangement is called a wet running electrical machine. The key advantage of a wet running electrical machine is the cooling of the winding overhang for greater performance.
Because of the direct heat dissipation, generally higher continuous outputs can be achieved with this solution with minimal design and engineering effort. In addition, with the omission of the water jacket, the electrical machine housing can have a simpler and more compact design. It is, however, essential to ensure the chemical resistance of the materials wetted with oil, particularly the copper conductors and the insulation materials. In addition, the oils used for cooling can as a rule only be used up to a maximum temperature of approx. 150 to 180 degC. This must be taken into account for the permissible stator temperature. Because the stator in a water cooled machine with maximum short time performance can also reach temperatures of over 200 degC, the shorttime performance may in contrast have to be reduced in an oil cooled machine. Both cooling media can furthermore be used in combination, e.g., cooling the jacket with coolant and cooling the rotor with oil. But, in view of the increased sealing effort involved, this combination is not very widely used.
Cooling of the transmission Cooling of the transmission The oil used for lubrication in the transmission absorbs the heat loss from toothflank contacts. The oil must be cooled as a result. A heat exchanger, in which the heat if the oil is dissipated to the coolant, is usually used for this purpose.
coolant. Oil to coolant heat exchangers : integrated into the oil sump are also used. Alternative topologies Aside from the described design, which is also referred to as axially parallel because the output shaft or the differential output is arranged parallel to the electrical machine's rotor shaft, there are further e axle topologies.
Coaxial e axle topology Coaxial e axle topology In the coaxial e axle topology the differential output is positioned coaxially to the electrical machine's rotor shaft. The torque at the end facing away from the transmission is provided by an additional intermediate shaft, which is guided by the hollow rotor shaft. The transmission can in this topology take the form of a two stage spur gear drive with countershaft or a singleor multi stage planetary gear. The advantages of the coaxial topology are the compact design and consequently small installation space requirement. The disadvantages are the increased costs owing to the mechanical complexity.
Arrangement of the power electronics Arrangement of the power electronics Aside from the axial arrangement, the topology of the e axle is determined by the position of the power electronics. A distinction is made here between jacket side and end face installation.
In the case of jacket side installation, the power electronics is positioned on the electrical machine's jacket surface. Here the power electronics can be vertically or horizontally aligned conductor bars and the signal cables.
In the case of end face installation, the power electronics is located on the end face of the electrical machine pointing away from the transmission .
T shaped topology T shaped topology Another topology that is being increasingly used is T shaped topology. Here the transmission forms the central unit in the middle of the e axle and accommodates the other two components. The electrical machine and the power electronics are mounted at the transmission end and the opposite end respectively. The HV conductor bars and the signal cables are routed past but very close to or even through the transmission. The advantage of this topology is that it uses side shafts of equal length without the need for an intermediate shaft. The drawbacks are the large installation space requirement and the thermal effects of the transmission on the power electronics.
Special solutions Special solutions As well as the widely used e axle topologies described here there are numerous special solutions, but these will not be considered any further here.
Vehicle integration and : interfaces The e axle can be installed in the vehicle both on the front axle and on the rear axle. All wheel applications are also possible accordingly. When it comes to the positioning of the e axle a distinction is made between two arrangements, with the position of the electrical machine being the critical factor. This can be positioned either facing the center of the vehicle .
Arrangement of the e axle  in the vehicle Arrangement facing the center of the Arrangement facing the center of the vehicle vehicle Characteristic of the arrangement facing the center of the vehicle is the position of the electrical machine between the two vehicle axles, i.e., within the wheelbase along similar lines to a mid engine arrangement .
The differential output of the e axle usually lies in the cross sectional plane of the vehicle axis. This position can however also be varied slightly according to the approach angles of the side shafts that can be achieved by the shaft joints, for example to create more space for the traction battery.
The key benefit of the arrangement facing the center of the vehicle is the small installation space requirement of the e axle in the area in front of the front axle and thus in the crash zone. In addition, further components can be arranged in front of the e axle on the front axle, e.g., the steering box or the air conditioning compressor. The drawback is the large installation space requirement between the axles, which is usually used for the battery.
Arrangement facing away from the center Arrangement facing away from the center of the vehicle of the vehicle In the arrangement facing away from the center of the vehicle the electrical machine is situated in the area in front of the front axle, the upshot of which is that more space can be made available between the axles for the battery.
Choice of arrangement in practice Choice of arrangement in practice There is essentially no preferred solution when it comes to choosing the e axle arrangement. This is very much dependent on the vehicle architecture. Both arrangements are therefore employed in virtually equal measure.
in the vehicle a) Electrical machine facing the traction battery, b) Electrical machine facing away from  the traction battery .
1 e axle, 2 HV cable , 3 Traction battery, 4 Plane of vehicle axis, 5 Center line of cross sectional plane. UAE1350 4Y
damaged cables must be exchanged : completely in the event of an accident. Interfaces The following interfaces are featured between the e axle and the vehicle: Electrical interfaces for high voltages . The ground connection is established by a conducting connection from the e axle housing to the vehicle's body structure.
Hydraulic interfaces Hydraulic interfaces The hydraulic connection to the vehicle cooling system is achieved by hoses and hose clamps or by special quick release locks.
Mechanical interfaces Mechanical interfaces The mechanical interfaces include the connection of the side shafts to transmit the torque to the wheels and the mounting of the e axle in the vehicle body. The vehicle side joints of the side shafts are inserted with splines into the two differential outputs. Alternatively, other joints may also be used, e.g., bolted flanges.
The e axle is usually mounted in the vehicle body by means of bolted rubber mounts. The rubber mounts reduce the forces on the vehicle structure generated by the dynamic torque support of the e axle and isolate the e axle acoustically from the vehicle structure. Consequently, the structure borne noise emitted by the e axle can only be transmitted to a small extent to the vehicle structure.
Depending on the vehicle architecture, an auxiliary frame can also be used which contains the connection of the e axle and the chassis. This auxiliary frame is in most cases also connected via bolted rubber mounts with the vehicle body, which brings about a double acoustic isolation of the drive from the vehicle body.
The compatibility of the e axle with different vehicle individual connection points is achieved through a number of bolting points on the e axle the connection to the vehicle body. Furthermore, thanks to the modularity of the e axle, the housing parts to be joined can also be fashioned individually for each vehicle and the e axle can thus be connected directly with the vehicle body without the use of brackets.
The largest shares are currently in the performance classes up to 150 kW, which are primarily used in the vehicle segments A .
Performance characteristic The provision of power to the e axle is determined by the performance characteristic of the three components, where the respective limitations of the components overlap .
The performance characteristic of the e axle is derived from the design and the thermal interactions of the components used. Integrating the components in the e axle offers advantages, but the thermal interactions must be taken into account.
UAE1351 2E 1000 1500 500 0 0 2000 1000 3000 4000 Nm Torque 30 0 60 90 120 150 kW Speed Speed rpm 1000 1500 500 0 Power rpm 1 a b 1 3 2 3 2 n1 n2 n1 n2
ponents can be dissipated and an over : heating of the components is prevented. The maximum current provided by the power electronics leads in the electrical machine to the requested torque, where further component specific boundary conditions must be observed, e.g., maximum permissible current in the electric conductors and dissipated of the heat loss arising here to the housing or the cooling medium. The maximum torque provided is crucial to the design of the transmission and other mechanical components .
Owing to the compact function integration in the e axle a sufficient heatloss dissipation within the permissible driving function areas poses a particular challenge. In this connection, local overheating, which leads to aging and damage mechanisms within the power electronics, electrical machine and transmission subassemblies, must be effectively prevented under different driving and operating conditions. To ensure this, various temperature sensors whose signals provide the necessary input variables for installed software component protection models are placed inside the e axle. These installed models help to provide comprehensive component protection inside the e axle which depending on the different driving and operating conditions automatically ensures a thermal overload regardless of driver intervention. The heat loss arising in the electrical machine must be dissipated in the best way possible by the cooling medium. This gives rise to the theoretical continuous performance of the electrical machine. Furthermore, the transmission's cooling concept is designed for a defined continuous output to prevent the permissible oil temperature from being exceeded.
The real continuous performance of the e axle is obtained with these boundary conditions , short time performance depending on the repetition rate is more relevant.
Efficiency As well as the targeted adaptation of the performance characteristic to the respective application, another development objective is to reduce the losses of the three components and thus to increase system efficiency. To determine system efficiency, it is necessary to multiply the efficiency maps of the components by each other. Through the targeted optimization of the individual components in the system context, it is thus possible to achieve an efficiency of up to 96 % at selected operating points in the e axle.
Furthermore, reducing the losses has a positive effect on the performance characteristic, particularly continuous performance. When the power dissipation of a component is reduced, that component is heated less with the result that with constant cooling power the limit for continuous performance is increased or cooling power can be reduced.
Scalability Through scaling and the efficient combination of the components, the torque and output of the e axle can be matched to the specific requirements with discrete stages in the combination of the components having been established along similar lines to the discrete performance classes listed at the outset. A certain degree of continuous scaling is possible within these stages.
The output or the maximum current made available in the power electronics is defined here primarily via the chip surface area of the power modules. The peripheral components of the power electronics  are also adapted accordingly.
The achievable electrical machine torque : can be scaled by means of the machine's diameter or length. The greater the diameter or the length, the greater the torque for the same current and same number of turns of the electrical machine. Furthermore, the torque and output of the electrical machine can varied by varying the number of turns .
It is possible by varying the step down ration to vary between the maximum torque and the maximum rotational speed. The higher the step down ratio, the higher  the torque and the lower the maximum rotational speed. Varying the step down ratio does not affect the maximum output.
Adaptation for application Additional optional elements can furthermore be integrated in the e axle. These are described in brief in the following. Intermediate shaft Because the e axle output shafts are not situated centrally in the vehicle in relation to the installation position, an intermediate shaft can be used to obtain side shafts of equal length and a higher number of common parts for the vehicle manufacturer. Beyond the pure cost advantage, this is also a prerequisite for symmetrical driving dynamics.
1 Power electronics, 2 Electrical machine, 3 Transmission, 4 Differential output .
from accidentally moving . The parking lock is preferably actuated electrically in the e axle. Hydraulic and pneumatic actuations are also possible, but this is only useful if the appropriate peripherals are provided, for example in the case of a two speed solution. The parking lock can also be actuated via a mechanical cable.
The translatory and rotatory vehicle masses are mechanically locked by means of a parking lock gear . This ensures that the driver leaves the vehicle in a safe state.
To prevent the vehicle from coming to an uncontrolled or an unwanted abrupt stop, the parking lock can no longer be engaged above a so called ratchet or pawl speed , the advantage that this does not rotate and consequently no voltage is induced and no kinetic energy of rotation is converted. This makes coasting possible, whereby the vehicle rolls without its own propulsion power.
Furthermore, it can also be beneficial in all wheel or hybrid applications to disengage the auxiliary drive and thereby minimize the losses. During the disengagement process, the electrical machine is synchronized without torque in the disengagement unit, rotationally disconnected, and brought to a controlled standstill. During the reconnect process, the electrical machine is synchronized accordingly without load to the current rotation speed of the rotating transmission or side shaft and then connected. Positive clutches have become established here.
The disengagement unit can essentially be implemented on each of the rotating shafts inside the e axle or also on the side shafts. In this way it is possible to disengage the rotatory masses including their friction points and thus also eliminate the transmission's drag losses.
When a PSM is used, it is also possible to tow the vehicle rolling on its wheels without inducing a voltage which otherwise is normally reduced for example by an active short circuit. As a result, the mechanical and thermal system loads are reduced and towing is made easier or made possible at all.
Connecting the air conditioning compressor As described already, the e axle is isolated from the vehicle structure, as a result of which the emitted structure borne noise is reduced. This property, together with short mechanical power transmission paths, offers the possibility of mounting the air conditioning compressor directly on the e axle. The e axle's high voltage distributor is used for the electrical power supply. Unlike an internal combustion engine, there is the additional benefit of lower thermal load by the electric drive because the latter produces no waste combustion heat.
Features: Fuel cell electric vehicles consists of the electric drive, as is known from the battery electric drive, and the fuel cell system. At the heart of the fuel cell system is the fuel cell stack, which consists of individual fuel cells.
Fuel cells are electrochemical converters which convert the chemical energy of the fuel directly into electrical energy. There is a large number of different fuel cell types that use different fuels and components. For motor vehicle applications currently the low temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cell , is the most interesting. In such a fuel cell the hydrogen reacts with oxygen to create water, releasing electrical energy in the process.
Advantages of fuel cells Within the field of electromobility fuel cell drives have the advantage of permitting the accustomed convenience of conventional vehicles such as short refueling time and long range with existing H2 infrastructure. As in an internal combustion engine energy storage and conversion are separated, which makes increased range possible by tank expansion. In particular, fuel cell drives therefore have an advantage when it comes to vehicles which call for high availability, useful load, and range. Examples include trucks, city and intercity buses, trains and ships, as well as commercially used vehicles such as taxis and company cars.
1 Fuel cell ECU, 2 Radiator, 3 Radiator fan, 4 e machine, 5 Transmission,  6 Power electronics, 7 Fuel cell stack, 8 Hydrogen tank, 9 HV battery, 10 Air compressor, 11 Humidifier, 12 Pressure control valve, 13 Muffler, 14 Temperature pressure sensor, 15 Anode recirculation fan, 16 Tank shutoff valve, 17 Hydrogen metering valve, 18 Safety valve. 1 14 14 15 16 17 18 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 H2 H2 O2 H2O 5 UAE1356 2Y
The ratio of battery power and total power varies for different applications. Typically, fuel cell systems are used as the primary energy source in the drivetrain. Such vehicles are characterized as strong fuel cell electric vehicles.
Alternatively, the battery can have a much greater power rating and energy content, and be recharged by a smaller fuel cell system where necessary. This drive concept is called fuel cell range extender because it allows the range of battery electric vehicles or the fuel cell system is directly configured for the higher power rating.
In the overall reaction hydrogen reacts : with oxygen to produce water, in the course of which electrical energy and heat are generated. The electrical energy can be converted in the circuit to mechanical energy. The waste heat is dissipated via coolant channels.
The gas flow begins in the bipolar plates .
ode through the membrane to the cathode. The product water must be transported from the catalyst layer via the gas diffusion layers to the channels in the bipolar plate and from there outwards.
Electrical properties of the fuel cell Shape of the Shape of the polarization curve polarization curve The electrical property of a fuel cell is depicted by the so called polarization curve . It generally has the shape depicted in Figure 4. The voltage of the cell is a direct indicator of its electrical efficiency, where 1.23 V is 100 %. As current and power increase the electrical efficiency of the fuel cell decreases because different losses come into play.
Range A: In the de energized state which cannot be measured towards the outside, which is why the OCV is for the most part in the range of 0.9 to 1 V.
Range B At low currents the voltage drops quickly first. Here losses which arise due to the chemical reaction of the reactants on the catalyst surface dominate. These losses increase rapidly with small electric currents, but hardly change at high currents . It is to be noted that range A is also actually reduced by this reaction kinetics of the leakage current.
The parameter set under which the polarization curve was plotted is decisive  and should be observed without fail in a comparison of different fuel cell types.
0 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.8 1.2 V 1.0 0 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.8 1.2 1.0 0 A 200 400 600 800 Current I Voltage U Power density 1 2 3 C D B A W/cm2 UAE1396 1E
Fuel cell stack: In order to achieve the high voltages required for a technical application, individual cells are electrically connected in series to form a stack . Each cell must be supplied separately with H2, air, and coolant.
These fuel cells consist, depending on the requirement, of up to 450 or more cells so that the maximum operating voltages can be up to 450 V.
Typically stacks in the power range up to 120 kW are used for passenger car drives. High electric currents are achieved either by large membrane surfaces or improved fuel cell materials . Currents up to 450 A flow at full load automotive applications.
Functioning principle of the fuel cell system At the heart of the fuel cell system is the fuel cell stack. Subsystems for oxygen and hydrogen supply and for temperature control are required to operate the stack. There are, in principle, different ways of realizing these subsystems. The one described here shows only one possible variant with an exemplary fuel cell system power rating of 100 kW net.
Hydrogen supply The hydrogen is stored in one or more high pressure tanks at a pressure of around 700 bar. According to the state of the art, type IV composite tanks with carbon fiber casing and HDPE lining .
The hydrogen metering valve is an electrically actuated valve used to set the pressure of the hydrogen on the anode side. In contrast to fuel injectors in internal combustion engines, the metering valve should set continuous mass flows. The metering valve can also be operated in clocked mode for small pressure and mass flow pulses, for example when using a suction jet pump.
In order to supply the stack over the entire active surface area with sufficiently high hydrogen concentration, the anode is operated under leaner than stoichiometric conditions . To increase system efficiency, the unconsumed hydrogen is returned from the anode output to the input.
1 End plate, 2 Membrane electrode unit with membrane, catalyst material, and gaskets, 3 Bipolar plate, 4 Gas channels, 5 Repeating units, 6 End plate.
Figure 6: Fuel cell system with drive: UAE1355 1E Electrical subsystem Stack Anode subsystem Low temperature cooling system High temperature cooling system Cathode subsystem Electric motor Transmission Inverter HV bus Fuel cell boost Converter DC/DC converter HV battery HV contacts FC control unit Stack anode Stack cathode Stack shutoff valves Stack bypass valve Pressurecontrol valve Radiator fan Radiator Radiator Pump Outgoing air Bypass valve Expansion tank Expansion tank Ion exchanger Coolant pump Coolant connections *** *** Water separator 1 stage electric air compressor with expander turbine Charge air cooler Humidifier Air M M Suction jet pump Hydrogenmetering valve M Air filter M Muffler Purge gases from anode system H2 H2 H2O H2 Hydrogen pressure tanks Water separator    * Safety valves   ** Pressure reducer  *** Cooling of accessories **** Purge gases to     cathode subsystem Hydrogen filling station O2 Tank shutoff valves Anode recirculation fan Tank valve Purge valve Drain valve * * **** **
Recirculation creates a closed system in which disruptive foreign gases are enriched over time and diffuse from the cathode side to the anode. These foreign gases are regularly discharged via an electrically actuated valve, the purge valve. This valve is mounted on the anode side on the stack outlet.
A water separator permanently removes liquid water from the anode circuit. The water collected in it is regularly drained via a valve. A combination of purge and drain valves in one component is possible. The hydrogen inevitably dissipated during draining and purging is either strongly diluted with air . Because this involves only small amounts of H2 which are not used in the fuel cell to produce electrical energy, the overall efficiency is only slightly reduced.
Oxygen supply The oxygen required for the electrochemical reaction is taken from the ambient air. The air mass of up to 120 g/s requested for 100 kW system power is inducted by an air compressor, compressed to max. 3 bar, and fed to the cathode side of the fuel cell. The pressure in the fuel cell is adjusted by a dynamic pressure control valve in the exhaust gas path downstream of the fuel cell.
To prevent the fuel cell stack from drying out on the inlet side, the air can be pre humidified, e.g., via a membrane humidifier, which removes some of the water vapor from the fuel cell waste air and transfers it to the dry supply air.
In the variant shown the air is diverted via an exhaust gas turbine seated on the shaft of the electric air compressor. The advantage of this is that using the enthalpy of the waste air relieves the load on the compressor drive motor and increases system efficiency. On the downside, an additional water separator is needed to protect the exhaust gas turbine against impingement.
Thermal management Fuel cells have an electrical efficiency in the range of around 50 % . This means that a large proportion of heat is released during the conversion of chemical energy to electrical energy which must be dissipated. In normal operation PEM fuel cells typically operate at an operating temperature of 60 degC to approximately 80 degC and thus at a much lower temperature level than internal combustion engines. The radiator and radiator fan must therefore be designed to be bigger in fuel cell systems in the vehicle drive in spite of the higher efficiency. Because the coolant used is in direct contact with the fuel cells, it must not be electrically conducting as otherwise internal short circuit would result. The coolant based on a deionized water glycol mixture is constantly deonized in the vehicle by an ion exchanger. The setpoint value for coolant conductivity is less than 5 uS/cm. The electric coolant pump directs a flow of coolant through all the incorporated components. For 100 kW system power the coolant delivery rate can be up to 220 l/min. A coolant control valve splits the flow of coolant between the radiator and the radiator bypass.
Sensor systems Operation of the fuel cell systems currently requires numerous sensors in the anode path, in the air path, and in the cooling circuit of the system. The pressure sensors familiar from the internal combustion engine must be adapted to the heightened requirements in the fuel cell system. This concerns above all robustness against hydrogen and high moisture. Sensors are furthermore required at numerous points to determine the hydrogen concentration. For fuel cell systems specifically hydrogen concentration sensors and coolant conductivity sensors are required. Furthermore, sensors in the hydrogen and air paths are subject to a heightened requirement with regard to hydrogen resistance and resistance to deionized water.
Safety: H2 specific dangers specific dangers H2 specific dangers result from the wide combustibility range of hydrogen air mixtures and the high energy content that is chemically stored in hydrogen. Depending on how the hydrogen is stored, even the high pressure or the low temperature can constitute a danger. The 700 bar compressed gas tank has established itself as the standard for "on road fuel tanks" and the associated infrastructure.
The handling of hydrogen in motor vehicles is governed by statutory provisions such as for example UNECE R134 . Here the primary focus of the statutory provisions is on sealing the hydrogen carrying parts, particularly the tank.
With regard to use in vehicles, it is essential to prevent the uncontrolled release and accumulation of hydrogen in closed or partly closed rooms. In addition, a design goal is in place to prevent ignition sources in the immediate vicinity of hydrogen carrying parts. Measures for detecting unwanted leakages are either system internal diagnostics or gas sensors installed in suitable positions.
Efficiency of the fuel cell system In addition to quickly providing the requested power to the stack under the best possible operating conditions, it is important to design the system for primarily operating at high efficiency.
In Figure 7, the efficiency of a fuel cell stack is compared by way of example with that of a fuel cell system. The secondary loads/consumers take up some of the electric power and thereby reduce the overall efficiency of the system. Fuel cell systems demonstrate substantially higher efficiency than an internal combustion engine, particularly in the frequently used part load range.
Electrical system typologies One or more DC/DC converters such as the compressor.
Components of the drivetrain Electric drive Electric drive The electric drive consists of power electronics , it is operated at voltages of up to 450 V. A voltage of up to 800 V can be selected for powerful vehicle classes and trucks.
The direct voltage of the traction electrical system is converted in the inverter into a multi phase alternating current where the amplitude is regulated as a function of the desired drive torque. During braking the electric machine is switched to generator mode. In this process the vehicle's kinetic energy is converted into electrical energy and fed back to the traction battery.
Traction battery Traction battery Depending on the application, high capacity or high energy batteries are used with voltages of between 150 V and 400 V . Nickel metal hydride or lithium ion batteries are used in high capacity applications, while only lithium ion batteries are used in high energy applications. A battery management system monitors the state of charge and the capacity of the battery.
DC/DC converter for the traction battery DC/DC converter for the traction battery A DC/DC converter regulates the traction battery's charge and discharge currents, where maximum currents of up to 300 A flow through the battery. This converter may be omitted in certain system configurations.
1 Fuel cell system, 2 Fuel cell DC/DC converter, 3 Vehicle control unit , 4 Battery charging socket, 5 Inverter, 6 e machines, 7 HV battery.
DC/DC converter for the fuel cell: DC/DC converter for the fuel cell Another DC/DC converter regulates the current from the fuel cell stack, where maximum currents of up to 500 A flow through the stack. This converter too may be omitted in certain system configurations.
power electric loads/consumers. The 12V vehicle electrical system is supplied from the traction electrical system. A DC/DC converter is used between the two networks for this purpose. This converter is electrically isolated for safety reasons. It operates unidirectionally or bidirectionally with a power output of up to 3 kW to keep the currents in the 12V electrical system within the limits.
Outlook Drives with fuel cells have already proven that they are suitable for everyday use. Estimates from 2015 by the Department of Energy start out from fuel cell system costs of 54 US$ per kW at 80 kW and 500,000 vehicles per year and additionally 488 US$ per kilogram of hydrogen for the tank.
System simplifications deliver both cost and reliability advantages. One approach is to develop new polymer membranes for fuel cells where it is not necessary to humidify the reaction gases and which at the same time allows the operating temperature to be increased.
Passenger car models available on the market are the Hyundai Nexo, the Toyota Mirai, the Honda Clarity Fuel Cell, and the Mercedes Benz GLC F Cell . German automobile manufacturers are planning market launches in the coming years.
.
, EU 406/2010: Commission Regulation  No 79/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on type approval of hydrogen powered motor vehicles.
1 Twist grip, 2 Brake lever, 3 Riding switch. BMS Battery Management System, VCU Vehicle Control Unit, AC Alternating Current, DC Direct Current,  HMI Human Machine Interface , CAN Controller Area Network, M Drive torque, o Motor speed, UDC Battery voltage, IDC  Current.
UAE1339 1E 1040 Electrification of the drive Features Definition and delimitation Like electromobility in the four wheel sector, mobility in the two wheel sector is also following the trend of electrification. With the focus on purely electric vehicles, vehicles in this sector can be a PHEV . Only vehicles with a battery electric drivetrain will be considered in more detail in the following.
EC168/2013 EC168/2013 It is possible with reference to the classification of light vehicles in accordance with EC168/2013 to categorize in particular twoand three wheel vehicles into vehicle segments. The vehicle classes for four wheel light vehicles will not be considered here. The segmentation applies to vehicles with internal combustion engines and electrically powered vehicles.
Requirements Two wheel electric vehicles are characterized by the fact that they have, compared with passenger cars, energy accumulators with relatively low energy content .
tronics, DC/DC converter, charger, battery, vehicle control unit .
The transmission of electrical mechanical energy from the electric machine to the wheel can be achieved by means of different technical solutions. The connection to the driving wheel can be established via a transmission, a toothed belt or a chain.
ages greater than 60 V, but some benefits of the 48 V technology are lost. These are on the one hand the omission of technical protection measures are permitted to work on the vehicle. Significant cost savings are thus possible.
Motor arrangement Two essentially different motor arrangements may be used within a system architecture. The central motor .
Battery arrangement Electric two wheels can furthermore be distinguished on the basis of the installation position of the battery. The battery can be installed close to the steering column at the front of the vehicle, in the running board area .
In order to establish the installation position of the battery, it is necessary to define beforehand the use to which the vehicle will be put. The type of battery used depends on this intended use. This constitutes an important extra dimension in the definition of electric two wheelers. A distinction is made here between permanently installed batteries, portable batteries with an additional plug in process, and portable batteries without an additional plug in process.
168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two or three wheel vehicles and quadricycles.
Overview: California introduced the first emission control legislation for gasoline engines in the mid 1960s. These regulations became progressively more stringent in the ensuing years. In the meantime, all industrialized countries have introduced emission control laws which define limits for gasoline and diesel engines, as well as the test procedures employed to confirm compliance.
tural, and forestry vehicles): Emission testing is performed on an engine test bench, as for heavy commercial vehicles. Emission control legislation Provided for information purposes only, no liability assumed for completeness! Furthermore, there are emission regulations for other two , three , and four wheel vehicles , for locomotives, for boats and ships, and for non road mobile machinery.
Type approval Type approval Type approvals are a precondition for granting General Certification for an engine or vehicle type. For this purpose, test cycles must be driven under specific operating conditions and emission limits must be complied with. The test cycles and emission limits are specified individually by each nation.
tions recorded in actual highway operation, e.g., the FTP test cycle ,
consisting of phases at constant cruising speed and acceleration rates, e.g., the MNEDC of the European Union.
The mass of pollutant emissions from each vehicle is determined by operating it in conformity with speed cycles precisely defined for the test cycle. During the test cycle, the exhaust gases are collected for subsequent analysis to determine the pollutant mass emitted during the driving cycle .
For heavy duty trucks and non road applications, steady state .
Serial testing .
In field monitoring In field monitoring In field monitoring involves the detection of type specific defects which result in dramatically increased pollutant emissions during the operation of vehicles under normal conditions of use. To this end, a check is carried out in the field on production vehicles to ascertain that they comply 100 % with the emission regulations. Privately owned production vehicles are randomly chosen for testing. The mileage and age of the vehicle must be within defined limits.
2015 marked the beginning of the incremental introduction of the new emission level LEV III to be completed by 2025 .
gorization of vehicles into vehicle classes. Emission limits Emission limits CARB legislation specifies limits for the carbon monoxide . On account of the very low emission limits, the LEV III legislation provides for an aggregate value of NMOG and NOx.
Pollutant emissions are measured in the FTP 75 driving schedule . The emission limits are correlated with the route driven during the test and are expressed in grams per mile.
The SFTP  was introduced in 2001. There are also further limits that require compliance in addition to FTP emission limits.
Since 2004 new vehicle registrations have been governed by the LEV II exhaust emission standard. The CO and NMOG limits from LEV I remain unchanged, but the NOx limit is substantially lower for LEV II.
LEV III provides for a total of six vehicle categories .
LDT Light Duty Truck, MDV Medium Duty Vehicle, HDV Heavy Duty Vehicle, PC Passenger Car, LDV Light Duty Vehicle, LVW Loaded Vehicle Weight ,  GVW Gross Vehicle Weight.
NMOG NOx LEV III LEV II LEV2 ULEV2.02 SULEV SULEV.05 ULEV.07 ULEV LEV ULEV SULEV 0.07 0.09 0.07 0.055 0.02 0.01 0.16 0.125 0.07 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 Exhaust gas emissions g mile SMA0095 2E LDT classes Gross vehicle weight LDT PC/LDV 1 2 4 5 MDV classes MDV Certification on chassis dynamometer Certification on engine test bench LVW <= 3,750 lbs lbs 14,000 10,000  8,500  3,750 LVW > 3,750 lbs Goods transport Optional from 2007 Certification on engine test bench Personal transportation > 12 persons Personal transportation <= 12 persons 8,500 lbs < GVW <= 10,000 lbs 10,000 lbs <= GVW <= 14,000 lbs HDV
Phase in : Phase in The LEV emission control standards will not be introduced from one year to the next, but instead by means of a "phase in", i.e., the incremental introduction of the requirements over a number of years for ever larger proportions of the new car fleet, e.g. for LEV II 25 % / 50 % / 75 % / 100 % of the newly registered vehicles in the model years 2004/5/6/7. This is accompanied by a "phase out" of the previous regulations.
The LEV III standard will be introduced between 2015 and 2025, phase out of LEV II by 2019. Particulate emissions are covered by separate phase in and phaseout from 2017 onwards.
Durability Durability In order to gain approval for vehicle types, vehicle manufacturers must certify that the emissions of limited pollutants do not exceed the respective limits over 50,000 miles or 5 years . LEV III has extended durability to 150,000 miles.
Durability test The vehicle manufacturer must supply two vehicle fleets from its production line for the durability test. One fleet in which each vehicle has driven 4,000 miles before the test, and one fleet for the endurance test with which the deterioration factors of individual pollutant components are measured.
Endurance testing entails subjecting the vehicles to specific driving cycles over distances of 100,000 and 120,000 or 150,000 miles. Exhaust gas emissions are tested at intervals of 5,000 miles and may not exceed the limits. Servicing and maintenance tasks may only be performed at the specified intervals.
cles are sold within one year. The limits : for "full useful life" apply to LEV III. The emission limits for the fleet average are different for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles.
The emission limit for the NMOG fleet average is reduced every year. To meet the lower fleet limit, manufacturers must produce progressively cleaner vehicles in the more stringent emissions categories in each consecutive year.
Fleet consumption .
Emission free vehicles Emission free vehicles The ZEV program , which are also intended to help reduce greenhouse emissions.
The ZEV program defines three categories of zero emission and partial zero emission vehicles. Genuine ZEV vehicles may not release any emissions when they are in operation. These vehicles are electric cars which are operated by a battery or a fuel cell.
system . This is achieved by extensive encapsulation of the tank and fuel system. This results in greatly reduced evaporative emissions by the overall vehicle.
AT PZEVs .
In field monitoring In field monitoring Non routine inspection Random emission testing is conducted on in use vehicles using the FTP 75 test cycle and for vehicles with gasoline engines an evaporative emission test. Depending on the relevant exhaust gas category, vehicles with mileage readings below 90,000 or 112,500 miles are tested.
Vehicle monitoring by the manufacturer Official reporting of claims or damage to specific emissions related components and systems has been mandatory for vehicle manufacturers since model year 1990. The reporting obligation remains in force for a maximum period of 15 years, or 150,000 miles, depending on the warranty period applying to the component or assembly.
The reporting method is divided into : three stages with an incremental amount of detail: Emissions Warranty Information Report . The California Air Resources Board is notified of information regarding complaints, fault quotas, fault analysis, and impacts on emissions. The agency uses the Field Information Report as the basis to decide whether to enforce a recall action on the vehicle manufacturer.
USA EPA legislation EPA .
Vehicle classes Vehicle classes With the transition to Tier 2, an additional vehicle class has been introduced in the form of the MDPV which are designed to carry up to 12 persons, are certified on a chassis dynamometer.
Light commercial vehicles are divided into two groups: LLDTs .
Emission limits Emission limits EPA legislation specifies limits for the pollutants carbon monoxide . Pollutant emissions are measured in the FTP 75 driving schedule. The emission limits are correlated with the route driven during the test and are expressed in grams per mile.
The SFTP  has been in force since 2000. Prevailing emission limits must be met in addition to FTP emission limits.
SMA0096 2E Gross vehicle weight lbs 14,000 10,000  8,500 6,000 Goods transport Optional from 2007 Certification on chassis dynamometer Personal transportation > 12 persons Personal transportation <= 12 persons MDPV Certification on engine test bench LDT classes LLDT PC/LDV 1 2 3 4 HLDT Certification on chassis dynamometer LVW <= 3,750 lbs LVW > 3,750 lbs ALVW <= 5,750 lbs ALVW > 5,750 lbs HDV
Since the introduction of Tier 2 standards : in 2004, vehicles with diesel and gasoline engines have been subject to identical exhaust emission limits.
Tier 3 Seven selectable certification bins will furthermore be made available for Tier 3. However, the standards are now formulated both for the fleet values and for the bins as an aggregate value of NMOG and NOx.
The Tier 3 legislation closely follows the Californian LEV III legislation in order to simplify the job of certification in the EPA and CARB areas for the vehicle manufacturers.
Durability has been extended for Tier 3 to 150,000 miles  or 15 years compared with 100,000 miles or 10 years for Tier 2.
Tier 3 also covers heavy pick ups and vans with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 6,500 lbs, which are now driven on a chassis dynamometer including the demanding SFTP test cycles. Within the Tier 2 legislation these vehicles were excluded from the SFTP tests.
Particulate emission limits are prescribed with the Tier 3 legislation for each vehicle. A limit for the particulate number  is currently not provided for.
for LEV II SMA0040 6E 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 10 Exhaust gas emissions 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 LEV ULEV SULEV Bin# LEV II EPA CARB g mile NMOG CO / 10 NOx PM 0.6 0.42 0.156 0.08 0.3 0.42 0.09 0.06 0.2 0.42 0.125 0.02 0.15 0.42 0.09 0.02 0.1 0.42 0.09 0.01 0.07 0.42 0.09 0.01 0.04 0.21 0.07 0.01 0.03 0.21 0.055 0.01 0.02 0.21 0.01 0.01 0.07 0.09 0.01 0.42 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.1 0.07 0.055 0.01 0.21 0 0 0 0 ZEV 0 0 0 0
Phase in: Phase in At least 25 % of all new passenger car and LLDT registrations were required to conform to Tier 2 standards which took effect in 2004. The phase in rule stipulated that an additional 25 % of vehicles would be required to conform to the Tier 2 standards in each consecutive year. All vehicles have been required to conform to Tier 2 standards since 2007. The phase in period for HLDT and MDPV terminated in 2009.
Tier 3 will be introduced between 2017 and 2025, phase out of Tier 2 by 2019. Particulate emissions are covered by separate phase in and phase out from 2017 onwards.
Fleet consumption " and not as otherwise usual in Europe for example the "amount of fuel used per unit distance" that is used. This representation of "fuel economy" corresponds to the reciprocal value of consumption per unit of distance.
The prescribed CAFE value was until 2010 27.5 mpg for passenger cars. This equates to a fuel consumption of 8.55 l of gasoline per 100 km. Up to 2004 the value for light commercial vehicles was 20.7 mpg or 11.36 l of gasoline per 100 km and was increased by 2010 to 23.5 mpg.
For model year 2011 the CAFE system was restructured for passenger cars and light duty trucks and ambitious target values were set: 33.3 mpg and 22.8 mpg for 2011, 40.1 mpg and 25.4 mpg for 2014, 43.4 mpg and 26.8 mpg for 2016, 46.8 mpg and 33.3 mpg for 2021, and 56.2 mpg and 40.3 mpg for 2025.
For the stages 2012 through 2016 and 2017 through 2025 an EPA regulation harmonized with the CAFE regulation for limiting greenhouse emissions applies in parallel to the CAFE legislation. The target value for a vehicle is dependent on the tire contact area between the wheels . The values for 2021 through 2025 were suspended in 2018 by the Trump administration. This led to complaints by CARB and many other US states. A reassessment by the Biden administration is expected.
At the end of each year the average "fuel economy" for each vehicle manufacturer is calculated based on the numbers of vehicles sold. The manufacturer must remit a penalty fee of $5.50 per vehicle for each 0.1 mpg its fleet falls short of the target. There is the possibility by way of a "credit/debit system" of balancing overfulfillment and underfulfillment in a year with "credits" and "debits" from other years.
Buyers will also have to pay a gas guzzler tax on vehicles with especially high fuel consumption. Here, the limit is 22.5 mpg . These penalties are intended to promote the sale of vehicles offering greater fuel economy.
The FTP 75 test cycle and the highway : cycle are applied to measure CAFE fuel economy .
A Fuel Economy Label provides vehicle buyers with information on fuel consumption. Model year 2008 sees the introduction of "5 cycle fuel economy" , which is intended to better reflect real driving conditions. This takes into account measurements in the SFTP schedules and in the FTP at 7 degC, which include among others aggressive acceleration, high final speed, and also operation with air conditioning.
In field monitoring In field monitoring Non routine inspection EPA legislation, just like CARB legislation, provides for an exhaust gas emission test in accordance with the FTP 75 test method to be carried out on in use vehicles on a random test basis. Testing is conducted on low mileage vehicles . The number of vehicles is dependent on the number sold. For vehicles with gasoline engines, at least one vehicle per test group is also tested for evaporative emissions.
Vehicle monitoring by the manufacturer For vehicles after model year 1972, the manufacturer is obliged to make an official report concerning damage to specific emission related components or systems if at least 25 identical emission related parts in a model year are defective. The reporting obligation ends five years after the end of the model year. The report comprises a description of damage to the defective component, presentation of the impacts on exhaust gas emissions, and suitable corrective action by the manufacturer. The environmental authorities use this information as the basis for determining whether to issue recalls to the manufacturer.
EU legislation The Directives of European emission control legislation are proposed by the EU Commission and ratified by the Council of Environment Ministers and the EU Parliament. The basis of emission control legislation for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles is Directive 70/220/EEC from 1970. For the first time it defined exhaust emission limits, and the provisions have been updated ever since.
The emission limits for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles LCV .
Instead of a "phase in" over several years as in the USA, a new emission control standard is introduced in two stages. In the first stage newly certified vehicle types must adhere to the newly defined emission limits. In the second stage generally one year later every newly registered vehicle .
EU directives allow tax incentives for vehicles that comply with upcoming exhaust gas emission standards before they actually become law. Depending on a vehicle's emission standard, there are also a number of different motor vehicle tax rates in Germany.
Engine certifications are performed for buses  and for vehicles with a permissible total weight in excess of 3.5 t. LDT engines can
distinguishing criterion with regard to the certification procedure. Vehicles with a reference weight of up to 2.61 t will be certified on a chassis dynamometer. Vehicles with a reference weight in excess of 2.61 t will be certified on an engine test bench. Flexible variations will be possible.
Emission limits Emission limits The EU standards specify limits for carbon monoxide .
NOx limit in addition to the aggregate value has applied to vehicles with diesel engines; in the case of gasoline vehicles, the aggregate has been replaced by separate HC and NOx limits.
The Euro 5 stage was introduced in two steps as Euro 5a and Euro 5b. Euro 5a .
The limits are different for vehicles with diesel and gasoline engines, but with Euro 6 will be brought further into line. The limits for LDT class 1 are the same as for cars. Passenger cars with a permissible total in excess of 2.5 t were for Euro 3 and Euro 4 treated as LDTs and were therefore likewise categorized into one of the three LDT classes. This option ceases to apply from Euro 5.
The limits are defined based on mileage and indicated in grams per kilometer .
LDT Light Duty Truck, MDV Medium Duty Vehicle, HDV Heavy Duty Vehicle, PC Passenger Car, LDV Light Duty Vehicle, LVW Loaded Vehicle Weight, GVW Gross Vehicle Weight. Note: The axes for GVW and RW must be considered separately! SMA0097 1E Reference weight in t Engine test bench: M1, N1, M2, N2, not M3 option.
Since September 2017 the MNEDC has : been replaced by the WLTC which is to make possible significantly more realistic consumption and emission measurements. Here the Euro 6c limits defined for the MNEDC have not been adapted to the WLTC.
This stage is called Euro 6d temp since, aside from the change to the WLTC, the new "Real Driving Emissions" test  will also be introduced with a first stage. Euro 6d with the second RDE stage will apply from January 2020.
NO PM Euro 3 Euro 4 Euro 5a Euro 5b Euro 6 x x 500 500 500 500 640 560 300 230 230 170 500 250 180 180 80 50 25 5 4.5 4.5
test are "full useful life" limit values, i.e., : they must be complied with even when the durability distance is reached. In order to take into account the aging of components up to the durability distance, deterioration factors are applied to the values measured in the type approval. These are defined in the legislation for every pollutant component; manufacturers are also allowed to present documentation confirming lower factors obtained during specified endurance testing .
With the Type I test, the primary exhaust gas test, the exhaust emissions are determined after cold starting in the MNEDC . In addition, the opacity of the exhaust gas is recorded for vehicles with diesel engines.
Type IV testing measures evaporative emissions from parked vehicles. This primarily concerns fuel vapor that evaporates from the fuel carrying system .
Type VI testing embraces hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions immediately following cold starts at 7 degC. Only the first section of the MNEDC is driven for this test. This test has been binding since 2002. A new test based on WLTC is being elaborated at UN ECE level.
The Type V test assesses the longterm durability of the emissions reducing equipment. In addition to the specified endurance test, alternative test procedures are possible from Euro 5 .
CO CO2 emissions  emissions For CO2 emissions there were no limits laid down by law until 2011; however, the vehicle manufacturers did enter into a voluntary commitment in Europe. Because the manufacturers failed to reach their target, a fleet target value has been laid down by law for passenger cars. Within an introductory phase from 2012 through 2015 a fleet value of 130 g/km must be achieved . For light commercial vehicles a similar regulation stipulates a target value of 175 g/km for 2017. A further reduction for passenger cars to 95 g/km and for light commercial vehicles to 147 g/km has been decided on for 2020/2021. These values are to
understood as mean values for all the : passenger cars and LDTs supplied by a vehicle manufacturer . The target value for a vehicle is dependent on the vehicle tare weight.
Since September 2017 new vehicle types have had to be certified in the WLTP  and then converted with the aid of the  CO2MPAS tool to MNEDC values, which were used to check whether the targets were achieved up to and including 2020. On the basis of the relative achievement of the target values in 2020 and the underlying MNEDC and WLTP values a manufacturer specific target value will be defined for 2021 and subsequent years. Further reductions have been agreed for 2025 and 2030, but could be lowered further within the framework of the "Green Deal".
If emissions from an individual vehicle fail substantially to comply with the standards, the source of the high emissions must be determined. If several vehicles display excessive emissions in random testing for the same reason, the results of the random test must be classified as negative. If there are various reasons, the test schedule may be extended, providing the maximum sample size is not reached.
If the type approval authorities detect that a vehicle type fails to meet the criteria, the vehicle manufacturer must devise suitable action to eliminate the defect. The action catalog must be applicable to all vehicles with the same defect. If necessary, a recall action must be started. Periodic Periodic emission testing emission testing In Germany all passenger cars and light commercial vehicles and vans are required to undergo emissions inspections three years after their initial registration, and then at subsequent intervals of two years. For vehicles with gasoline engines, the main focus is on CO levels and l closed loop control, while for vehicles with diesel engines, the opacity test is the main criterion. Data from the diagnostic system are taken into consideration for vehicles with On Board Diagnostic systems .
Comparable tests are also available in other countries; in Europe, for example, in Austria, France, Spain, and Switzerland, and in many parts of the USA in the form of "Inspection and Maintenance".
Japanese legislation The permitted emission values are also subject to gradual stages of severity in Japan. The limit values have since September 2007 been subject to further tightening within the framework of the "New Long Term Standards".
Vehicles with diesel engines have since September 2010 been subject to further tightening of the limit values in the form of the "Post New Long Term Regulation". In the case of vehicles with gasoline engines, the previous synthetic test cycles were replaced in two stages by the more realistic JC08 cycle. In 2018 Japan also introduced the WLTC based on UN GTR No. 15 . Unlike the EU, only the first three phases apply. The NMHC limit values for vehicles with gasoline engines and the NOx limit values for vehicles with diesel engines are adapted.
Vehicle classes : Vehicle classes Vehicles with a permissible total weight up to 3.5 t are essentially divided into three classes than the other two vehicle classes. For diesel engines, the vehicle categories are distinguished by NOx and particulate limits.
MDV Medium Duty Vehicle, HDV Heavy Duty Vehicle, PC Passenger Car, LDV Light Duty Vehicle, GVW Gross Vehicle Weight, EIW Equivalent Inertia Weight. Gross vehicle weight 3.5 t 1.7 t PC HDV MDV EIW > 1.265 t EIW <= 1.265 t LDV Goods transport Personal transportation > 10 persons Personal transportation <= 10 persons 12 t HDV SMA0098 2E
Evaporative emissions Evaporative emissions The exhaust gas regulations in Japan  include limits on evaporative emissions in vehicles with gasoline engines, which are measured using the SHED method .  Japan is adopting the WLTC based test procedure of UN GTR 19 , which has been influenced by the developments of the EU test procedure. Different tank systems are taken into account.
Durability Durability Manufacturers must demonstrate a durability of 45,000 km for vehicles with diesel engines. 80,000 km apply to all stages for vehicles with gasoline engines.
Fleet consumption Fleet consumption In Japan targets apply to the fleet consumption of a manufacturer for 2010 and 2015, based on target values for vehicle weight classes. For tax incentive purposes there are two stages rewarding fuel consumption which is improved by 15 % and 25 % respectively.
Chinese legislation China has, up to and including Stage 5  of 20 mg/km has been adopted from the USA. For China 6b the limit values for HC, NMHC, CO, and NOx are reduced to approximately 50 % of the Euro 6 limit values for gasoline engines. PM is reduced to 3 mg/km, PN and N2O remain the same.
The Type VI test applies to vehicles with gasoline and diesel engines as of China 6a. In the first two phases of the WLTC limit values must be observed for HC of 1.2 g/km, CO of 10 g/m, and NOx of 0.25 g/km.
China is also introducing an RDE test for the type approval and in field monitoring. As of China 6a RDE tests must be conducted , as of China 6b "Conformity Factors" CF apply of 2.1 for NOx and PN for all gasoline and diesel engines. The test procedures are based on an intermediate stage of the EU RDE legislation, e.g., the cold start period is not taken into consideration and additional boundary conditions are defined, e.g., measurements up to an altitude of 2,400 m and lower top speeds for freeway driving. A review of the CF is envisaged by mid 2022.
7/2023 for RDE only monitoring and : 160,000 km as the durability distance. China has also developed its own requirements for limiting fuel consumption and thus CO2 emissions. In four stages , which similarly to the EU CO2 fleet targets sets target values dependent on vehicle weight for the consumption for the fleet of a manufacturer in the periods 2012 through 2015 and 2016 through 2020. Target values for the entire fleet are 6.9 l gasoline per 100 km for 2015 and 5.0 l gasoline per 100 km for 2020. For 2025 the target value is 4.0 l gasoline per 100 km.
China uses a variety of measures, such as for example tax reductions, to promote the introduction of electrified vehicles .
Test cycles for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles US test cycles FTP 75 test cycle FTP 75 test cycle The FTP 75 test cycle .
Collection of pollutants The vehicle is started and driven on the specific speed cycle on a chassis dynamometer. The emitted pollutants are collected in separate bags during defined phases .
Phase cs .
Phase hs For hybrid vehicles, a further phase hs is driven. It corresponds to the progression of phase cs. For other vehicles, it is assumed that the emission values are identical to the cs phase.
Assessment: The bag samples from the first two phases are analyzed during the pause before the hot test. This is because samples may not remain in the bags for longer than 20 minutes.
The sample exhaust gases contained in the third bag are also analyzed on completion of the driving cycle. The total result includes emissions from the three phases rated at different weightings.
The pollutant masses of phases ct and cs are aggregated and assigned to the total distance of these two phases. The result is then weighted at a factor of 0.43.
The same process is applied to the aggregated pollutant masses from phases ht and cs, related to the total distance of these two phases, and weighted at a factor of 0.57. The test result for the individual pollutants is obtained from the sum of the two previous results.
600 s pause 594 s 600 s 765 s Mean cycle speed: 34.1 km/h 34.9 km/h 77.3 km/h 77.4 km/h Maximum cycle speed: 91.2 km/h 88.2 km/h 129.2 km/h 96.4 km/h 505 s a c d b 867 s 594 s SCO3 600 s 600 s US06 Idle 765 s 505 s 90 s 505 s Engine off ct phase ct phase 0 0 40 80 60 120 km/h km/h 0 60 120 km/h 0 60 120 km/h 505 s 600 s ct phase cs phase ht phase Engine off
For preconditioning, the SC03 and US06 cycles proceed through the ct phase from FTP 75 without exhaust gas collection. However, other conditioning procedures are also possible.
Cold start enrichment, which is necessary when a vehicle with a gasoline engine is started at low temperatures, produces higher emissions. These cannot be measured in current emissions testing, which is conducted at ambient temperatures of 20 to 30 degC. An additional exhaust gas test is performed at  7 degC on vehicles with gasoline engines in order to limit these pollutants. However, this test only prescribes a limit for carbon monoxide; a nationally applicable fleet limit was introduced for NMHC emissions in 2013. Test cycles for determining fleet Test cycles for determining fleet  consumption  consumption Each vehicle manufacturer is required to provide data on corporate average fuel economy. Manufacturers that fail to comply with the target values are required to pay penalties.
Fuel consumption is determined from the exhaust gas emissions produced during two test cycles the FTP 75 test cycle . This cycle is driven during the running loss test for vehicles with a gasoline engine.
New York City Cycle . It simulates low speeds in urban traffic with frequent stops.
Hybrid cycle For hybrid vehicles the phase hs .
Collection of pollutants: The exhaust gas is collected in bags in two phases: the Urban Driving Cycle .
WLTC WLTC Within the framework of the UN ECE a new test cycle WLTC  compared with the previous regulation which is to make possible significantly more realistic consumption and emission measurements.
Among other things, the following have been defined for the WLTP test procedure: a method for shift point calculation for manual transmissions, higher vehicle weights by taking into account payload and equipment options, improved methods for determining the coasting parameters, stepless adjustment of the chassis dynamometer, and 23 degC as the test temperature. Aside from the fundamental test procedure, special requirements for electrified vehicles such as hybrid and electric vehicles have also been elaborated.
3 % of the freeway time) Total driving time 90 to 120 min Secondary loads Operation of the air conditioning system and the other secondary loads must correspond to their possible use by the load under normal driving conditions on the road.
Altimeter Moderated: h <= 700 m Extended: 700 m < h <= 1,300 m Starting and end points may not differ in their height above sea level by more than 100 m.
Temperature Moderated:  Stage 1: 3 degC <= T <= 30 degC  Stage 2: 0 degC <= T <= 30 degC Extended : Stage 1: 2 degC <= T < 3 degC, or 30 degC < T <= 35 degC  Stage 2: 7 degC <= T < 0 degC, or 30 degC < T <= 35 degC Vehicle capacity weight and test weight Basic capacity weight: driver, front passenger, test equipment. Maximum weight from basic capacity weight and artificial capacity weight: max. 90 % of the sum total of the "weight of passengers" and the "capacity weight".
Japanese test cycle JC08 test cycle JC08 test cycle In 2008 a new exhaust gas test was introduced in the form of the JC08 has replaced the JC08.
Emission control legislation for heavy commercial vehicles US legislation Vehicle classes Vehicle classes Heavy commercial vehicles are defined in EPA legislation as vehicles with a gross vehicle weight over 8,500 lbs or 10,000 lbs .
In California, all vehicles over 14,000 lbs . To a great extent, Californian legislation is identical to parts of EPA legislation. However, there is an additional program for city buses.
Emission limits Emission limits The US standards specify limits for diesel engines for hydrocarbons .
Another very drastic tightening of emission restrictions came into force in model year 2007. The NOx and particulate emissions are separately limited and are a tenth of the previous values. These are not achievable without the use of exhaust gas treatment systems .
From model year 2024 with the introduction of the CARB Low NOx Regulation  the nitrogen oxide limits will be reduced by 90 % and the previous particulate emission limit halved in California. Massively increased durability requirements will additionally apply from model year 2027.
A binding share of sales of zeroemission vehicles is prescribed in California for model years 2024 through 2035 .
To help compliance with severe particulate limits, the maximum permitted sulfur content in diesel fuel was reduced to 15 ppm from mid 2006.
For heavy commercial vehicles in contrast with cars and light commercial vehicles there are no limits specified for average fleet emissions and fleet consumption.
Consent Decree Consent Decree In 1998 a legal agreement was reached between EPA, CARB, and a number of engine manufacturers. It provides for sanctions against manufacturers if they make illegal modifications to engines to achieve optimized consumption in the highway cycle, resulting in higher NOx emissions. The "Consent Decree" specifies that the applicable emission limits must also undercut the steady state  European 13 stage test in addition to the dynamic test cycle. Furthermore, emissions are not allowed to exceed the limits for model year 2004 by more than 25 %, regardless of driving mode within a specified engine speed/torque range .
EU, USA, Japan UMA0093 3E ETC limits ESC limits Euro IV US 2010 with NOx bonus for 2007 to 2009
These additional tests have been man : datory for all diesel commercial vehicles since model year 2007. However, emissions in the not to exceed zone may be up to 50 % above the emission limits.
Fuel consumption requirement Fuel consumption requirement In the USA there are separate requirements with regard to greenhouse gas emissions .
EU legislation Vehicle classes Vehicle classes In Europe, all vehicles with a permissible gross vehicle weight of over 3.5 t, or capable of transporting more than nine persons, are classified as heavy commercial vehicles are based on the Basic Directive 88/77/EEC .
Emission limits Emission limits As for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, new emission limit levels for heavy commercial vehicles are introduced in two stages. New engine designs must meet the new emission limits during type approval. One year later compliance with the new emission limits is a prerequisite for registering a new vehicle. The legislator can inspect conformity of production  by taking engines out of serial production and testing them for compliance with the new emission limits.
For commercial vehicle diesel engines, the Euro standards define emission limits for hydrocarbons .
. These European test cycles were conducted with the engine running at normal operating temperature. Since Euro V a cold start test has also been required.
Within the Euro III legislation a distinction was still made between large engines , with higher permissible particulate emission limits for the smaller units. This distinction is dropped for new certifications with the introduction of Euro IV.
The Euro V emission limit level was introduced in October 2008 for all new engine approvals, and one year later for all new serial production vehicles. Only the NOx emission limits were more severe compared to Euro IV.
In January 2013 the Euro VI emission limit level for new engine types came into force .
GVW: 7 years or 500,000 km . Fuel consumption Fuel consumption CO2 emissions from heavy commercial vehicles with a permissible gross vehicle weight of more than 16 t are to be reduced by 15 % by 2025 and by 30 % by 2030.
These targets signify a relative lowering referred to average determined emissions from vehicles of a manufacturer with a reference time period of 07/2019 through 06/2020.
Subcategories are created with regard to the CO2 output values, depending on vehicle type  and axle configuration.
CO2 is calculated by means of a simulation tool .
Very low emission vehicles: Very low emission vehicles Prior to the introduction of the Euro V standard it was possible to meet voluntarily at an early stage more demanding, so called EEV limit values . Voluntary early meeting of these limits permitted tax incentives. EEV limit values for HC, NMHC, CO, and exhaust gas opacity were lower than the Euro V limit values. NOx and particulate limits were equivalent to the Euro V ESC limits. Naturalgaspowered city and tourist buses are typical examples of EEV vehicles.
Japanese legislation Vehicle classes Vehicle classes In Japan, vehicles with a permissible gross vehicle weight of over 3.5 t, or capable of transporting more than ten persons are classified as heavy commercial vehicles .
Emission limits Emission limits In October 2005 the "New Long Term Regulation" was introduced and was valid until the end of 2009. It stipulated emission limits for hydrocarbons there are now no smoketest specifications.
The "Post New Long Term Regulation" came into force in September 2009. The particulate and NOx limits were reduced by almost two thirds compared with 2005 levels.
Durability Durability Compliance with the emission limits must be demonstrated over a defined mileage in which a distinction is drawn between three classes, each with increasing durability requirements.
Fuel consumption requirement Fuel consumption requirement Fuel consumption limits are prescribed for trucks and buses with a permissible gross vehicle weight of over 3.5 t. Two driving cycles  are used.
Fuel consumption is determined on the engine test bench. Because consumption is very much dependent on the individual vehicle engine and equipment specification , the calculation is made using a conversion program. The requirements are for a commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight smaller than 10 t 13.4 l/100 km, for semitrailer trucks with a gross vehicle weight smaller than 20 t 32.1 l/100 km/l, and for buses with a gross vehicle weight smaller than 14 t 18.9 l/100 km. The figures apply to 2025. Regional programs Regional programs In addition to the nationwide regulations for new vehicles, there are also regional requirements for the overall vehicle population aimed at reducing existing emission levels by replacing or upgrading old diesel vehicles.
The "Vehicle NOx Law" has been in force : since 2003 within, among other places, the greater urban area of Tokyo to vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of over 3,500 kg. It states that 8 to 12 years after a vehicle is first registered, the NOx and particulate limits of the relevant preceding phase of emission limits must be adhered to. The same principle also applies to particulate emissions. Here, the regulation will already apply seven years after first vehicle registration.
Test cycles for heavy commercial vehicles For heavy commercial vehicles, all test cycles are run on the engine test bench. In the transient test cycles, the emissions are collected and evaluated according to the CVS principle. The untreated emissions are measured in the stationary test cycles. Emissions are specified in g/kWh. USA EPA Engine Dynamometer Schedule  EPA Engine Dynamometer Schedule  for Heavy Duty Diesel Engines for Heavy Duty Diesel Engines .
UMK1632 2E 20 40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 0 0 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1,000 1,100 s Time Engine speed n* Torque M*
Federal Smoke Cycle : Federal Smoke Cycle An additional test, the Federal Smoke Cycle, tests exhaust gas opacity under dynamic and quasi steady state conditions. In this test, for different load conditions , a number of sudden full load accelerations are run on an engine test bench to determine exhaust gas opacity.
Additional test cycle Additional test cycle Since model year 2007 US emission limits have also had to comply with the European 13 stage test may be max. 50 % above the emission limits.
15% 10% 5% 8% 8% 9% A Idle Speed Idle Power Maximum Speed 1 7 11 9 3 4 8 5 6 2 13 12 10 0 25 50 75 100 Load % B C A B C X X NOx measurement at 3 random operating points X X 30% 25 50% 50 75 100% 5% 10% 5% 5% 10% 5% 5% SMA0043 1E
Europe: Up to Euro V all European test cycles started with a hot engine. Since EU VI a cold start test and a hot start test have been used European Steady State Cycle European Steady State Cycle For vehicles over 3.5 t permitted gross vehicle weight and more than 9 seats, the 13 stage test ESC . The test procedure specifies measurements in 13 steady state operating states calculated from the engine full load curve. The emissions measured at each operating point are weighted according to certain factors. This also applies to power output. The test results are obtained for each pollutant by calculating the total of the weighted emissions divided by the total of the weighted power output.
An additional three NOx tests may be performed in the test range when certification is performed. The NOx emissions may not vary by a significant degree from the levels measured at the adjacent operating points. The additional measuring has the goal of preventing engine modifications performed specially for the test. European Transient Cycle European Transient Cycle As well as Euro III, the ETC it has been obligatory for all vehicles.
SMA0100E SMA0101 1E nref 180 s Motoring 80% 60 40 20 Idle 180 s Cold start Hot start test 600 s standstill Load Speed 80 100% 60 40 20 0
The test cycle is derived from realistic : road driving patterns and is subdivided into three sections: an urban section, an extra urban section, and an expressway section. The length of the test is 30 minutes, and the periods of time for which engine speeds and torque levels must be maintained are specified in seconds.
World harmonized cycles World harmonized cycles Since 2013 world harmonized engine test cycles have had to be applied with the introduction of the Euro VI emission limit level. The prescribed limits must be equally met both in the WHSC , as was previously customary only in the USA. The NTE test is conducted in any driving mode within a specified engine speed/torque range.
clearly more overrun phases. The associated lower exhaust gas temperatures pose a challenge to active exhaust gas treatment systems, which must be regularly regenerated.
Real Road PEMS Tests Real Road PEMS Tests With the Euro VI legislation, in addition to the certification tests on the engine test bench, emissions from real road journeys are determined both for type approval and for checking vehicles already in operation for this purpose. The procedure is comparable with the RDE test of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles.
Japan: JE05 test cycle JE05 test cycle Pollutant emissions were determined between October 2005 and October 2016 in the transient JE05 test cycle . Similarly to the European transient test for passenger cars, the JE05 test cycle for commercial vehicles comprises an extra urban part, an urban part, and an expressway part. The test lasts 1,830 seconds and is started when the engine is hot.
Unlike the European and US commercial vehicle tests, the JE05 test specifies the driving speed instead of the engine speed and engine torque. Because the test is conducted on an engine test bench, the quantities required of engine speed and torque are determined from the specified speeds and from the individual vehicle data using a conversion program. Required quantities include, among others, vehicle weight, tire rolling resistance, transmission ratios, torque curve, and maximum engine speed. With the introduction of the Post PNLT limit stages the harmonized European test cycles WHSC, WHTC, and WNTE are used for certification.
Emission legislation for motorcycles The USA also led the way in introducing emission regulations for motorcycles. But because motorcycles only constitute a very small percentage of the overall traffic volume and consequently a very small percentage of the overall emissions and immissions, these requirements were for a long time not subject to further development compared with those for passenger cars and commercial vehicles. It was therefore left to the EU and Asian countries such as Japan to drive forward requirements for motorcycles and other L category vehicles . The EU regulations were incorporated into ECE Regulations, which are used by countries where twoand three wheel vehicles are popular such as India, China, and other Southeast Asian countries as the basis for their national legislation. In these countries motorcycles play an important role as a means of transport for persons and goods, with high mileages in both urban and rural areas. Japan, Taiwan, and Thailand have introduced their own regulations for motorcycles.
The targets and instruments such as emission limits, test cycles, test procedures, and monitoring options are basically the same as those for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles with gasoline engines are considered here.
US legislation Exhaust gas emissions Exhaust gas emissions The EPA introduced the first requirements for motorcycles in 1978. California had between 1988 and 2003 its own requirements, which were extended and tightened from 2004/2008. The EPA introduced only in 2006/2010 new requirements which are based on the Californian requirements from 2004/2008 and carry over to the entire USA.
The exhaust gas emissions are measured in the FTP cycle on a chassis dynamometer at a temperature of between 20 degC and 30 degC. The emission limits are correlated with the route ridden during the test and are expressed in grams per km. The limits depend on the class and are not fuel dependent.
Evaporative emissions Evaporative emissions CARB introduced requirements for evaporative emissions from 1983. Since 2001 all classes have been governed by a limit value of 2.0 g per test in the SHED test , which differs in terms of procedure and duration from the test for passenger cars. Here, after the vehicle has undergone preconditioning including preparation of the activated carbon canister and with the tank filled to the defined level of 40 %, the actual tests start.
1st test: Tank breathing losses A linear temperature increase is conducted over 60 minutes in the SHED. Here a distinction is made between exposed and non exposed tank and between fuel liquid and fuel vapor temperature. The hydrocarbon emissions given off by the vehicle are measured.
2nd test: Hot soak losses Following the first test the vehicle is heated in a defined riding cycle and then the increase in HC concentration is measured in the SHED over a period of one hour as the vehicle cools down.
The EPA does not demand a SHED test, but instead focuses on limiting the permeability for hydrocarbons from fuel tank and lines by means of permeation limits. To this end, the vehicle manufacturer can either carry out a permeation test, use EPA certified materials , or install certified components from suppliers.
CARB is working on an update of the legislation including OBD for motorcycles and checking a harmonization with the EU requirements. EPA is following the development at CARB and within the
EU/ECE legislation The basis of the EU emission legislation for motorcycles and other L category vehicles with two, three and four wheels is the General Type Approval Directive 92/61/EEC limits and exhaust gas emissions were defined on a European level for the first time and have been constantly updated ever since.
As for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, so too for L category vehicles the EU legislation serves as the model for the UN Regulations. These feature all the contents of the EU legislation, i.e., they reflect the EU stages described below. New requirements, which are aiming for worldwide harmonization and acceptance, are elaborated on a UN level. This applies in particular to the Worldwide harmonized Motorcycle Testing Cycle  in the Global Technical Regulation GTR No. 2 .
As for passenger cars, a type approval applies to an EU stage up to the point when the next stage is prescribed with binding effect.
The exhaust gas emissions are measured in a defined test cycle on a chassis dynamometer in the Type I test at a temperature of between 20 degC and 30 degC. The emission limits are correlated with the route ridden during the test and are expressed in milligrams per km. They are in part fuel dependent, i.e., different for gasoline and diesel engines.
Euro 5 umax < 130 km/h WMTC 30 : 70 1000 100 68 60 4.5 umax >= 130 km/h WMTC 25 : 50 :25 1000 100 68 60 4.5
To obtain approval for each vehicle model, the manufacturer must prove that the emissions of the limited pollutants do not exceed the respective limits over the service life prescribed by law . From Euro 4 for motorcycles with a top speed of 130 km/h or more the service life is 35,000 km, for a top speed of less than 130 km/h it is 20,000 km.
The type approval test in the Type I test is conducted with a test vehicle which has been broken in for 1,000 km .
Aside from the primary requirement in the Type I test, there is as a further exhaust gas requirement the Type II test, in which the CO emissions are determined at idle.
As for passenger cars, there is no Type VI test at 7 degC for motorcycles. OBD I is introduced with Euro 4, OBD II in two stages as of Euro 5.
Evaporative emissions Evaporative emissions As with passenger cars, motorcycles with gasoline engines are subject to requirements to limit evaporative emissions .
CO CO2 emissions emissions For motorcycles, the CO2 emissions must also be measured in the same test as for the Type I test and from them the fuel consumption calculated. There are however no fleet targets as for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles.
The Japan specific legislation with a synthetic cycle was replaced from 2012 on the basis of GTR No. 2 by the WMTC, with limit values equivalent to the previous stage.
A new requirement added from 10/2017 is the limitation of evaporative emissions. The test procedure corresponds to the Californian SHED test with a limit value of 2.0 g HC per test.
From 10/2017 Japan will also introduce its own J OBD I regulation. This is based on Euro 4 OBD I and on the general OBD requirements of CARB OBD II. J OBD II on the basis of Euro 5 is planned.
Chinese legislation: China has introduced the EU legislation in stages. The stage China 3 from 7/2008 will be replaced from 7/2018 by China 4, which corresponds in terms of exhaust gas and evaporative emissions to Euro 4. Euro 4 OBD I on the other hand has not been adopted; instead, a China specific basic OBD I regulation is being developed. The next stage China 5 based on Euro 5 is in development and is to be published in 2022.
Indian legislation India has introduced the EU legislation in stages. The stage Bharat IV from 4/2016 corresponds to Euro 3. The stage Euro 4 is to be skipped and from 4/2020 replaced by Bharat VI, which corresponds in terms of exhaust gas and evaporative emissions to Euro 5. OBD I is to be introduced in 4/2020 and OBD II from 4/2023, if necessary in two stages as in the EU.
________________________________ References References 70/220/EEC: Council Directive of 20 March 1970 on the approximation of laws of the Member States relating to measures to be taken against air pollution by gases from positive ignition engines of motor vehicles.
 Regulation and on access to  vehicle repair and maintenance information.
 UN GTR No. 19: Global Technical Regulation No. 19 EVAPorative emission test procedure for the Worldwide harmonized Light vehicle Test Procedure .
 Regulation No. 715/2007 and Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directives 80/1269/EEC, 2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC.
 88/77/EEC: Council Directive of 3 December 1987 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to measures to be taken against the emission of gaseous pollutants from diesel engines for use in vehicles.
64/2012 of 23 January 2012 amending Regulation .
 Commission : Regulation .
 Council Directive 92/61/EEC of 30 June 1992 relating to the type approval of two or three wheel motor vehicles.
 Directive 97/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 1997 on certain components and characteristics of two or three wheel motor vehicles.
 UN GTR No. 2: Measurement procedure for two wheeled motorcycles equipped with a positive or compression ignition engine with regard to the emission of gaseous pollutants, CO2 emissions and fuel consumption .
Exhaust gas testing: Requirements Exhaust gas tests on chassis dynamometers are used for the type approval to attain General Certification, as well as to develop engine or other components. They differ from exhaust gas tests that are conducted in Germany for example in the course of "general and partial inspection for exhaust gas" using workshop measuring devices. In addition, exhaust gas tests are carried out on engine test benches, for instance for the type approval of heavy commercial vehicles.
1 Roller with dynamometer, 2 Upstream catalytic converter, 3 Underfloor catalytic converter,  4 Filter, 5 Particulate filter, 6 Dilution tunnel, 7 Mix T, 8 Valve, 9 Dilution air conditioner,  10 Dilution air, 11 Exhaust gas/air mixture, 12 Blower, 13 CVS system . UWT0101 1E
Test setup General setup General setup The test vehicle is parked on a chassis dynamometer with its drive wheels on the rollers . This means that the forces acting on the vehicle, i.e., the vehicle's moments of inertia, rolling resistance and aerodynamic drag, must be simulated so that the trip on the test bench reproduces emissions comparable to those obtained during an on road trip. For this purpose, asynchronous machines, direct current machines, or even electrodynamic retarders on older test benches, generate a suitable speed dependent load that acts on the rollers for the vehicle to overcome. More modern machines use electric flywheel simulation to reproduce this inertia. Older test benches use real flywheels of different sizes attached by rapid couplings to the rollers to simulate the vehicle weight. A blower mounted in front of the vehicle provides the necessary engine cooling.
The test vehicle exhaust pipe is generally a gas tight attachment to the exhaust gas collection system the dilution system is described below. A proportion of the exhaust gas is collected there. At the end of the driving test, the gas is analyzed for gaseous emission limit components .
Following the introduction of the emission control legislation, particulate emissions were initially limited in diesel engine vehicles only. In the last few years, legislators have also begun to limit these emissions in vehicles with gasoline engines. To determine particulate emissions, a "dilution tunnel" is used with a high internal flow turbulence . Particulate filters are also used to calculate particulate emission based on load.
In addition, and for development purposes, part of the exhaust gas flow can be extracted continuously from sampling points in the vehicle's exhaust gas system or dilution system to analyze the pollutant concentrations.
The test cycle is repeated by a driver in the vehicle. The required and current driving speeds are displayed on a driver control station monitor. In some cases, an automated driving system replaces the driver to increase the reproducibility of test results.
Test setup for diesel engine vehicles Test setup for diesel engine vehicles To determine the pollutant emissions from diesel vehicles, it is necessary to make some changes to the test bench setup and to the measuring techniques used. The complete sample taking system, including the exhaust gas measuring device for hydrocarbons, must be heated to 190 degC. This is to prevent condensation of hydrocarbons which have high boiling points, and to evaporate the hydrocarbons that have already condensed in the diesel exhaust gas.
Dilution system Purpose of the CVS method Purpose of the CVS method The most commonly used method of collecting the exhaust gases emitted from an engine is the CVS dilution procedure . It was introduced for the first time in the USA in 1972 for passenger cars and light duty commercial vehicles. In the meantime, it has been improved in several stages. The CVS method is used in other countries, such as Japan. It has also been in used in Europe since 1982. It is therefore an exhaust gas collection method that is recognized throughout the world.
In the CVS method, the exhaust gas is only analyzed at the end of the test. Therefore the condensation of water vapor and the resulting nitrogen oxide losses and
Principle of the CVS method Principle of the CVS method The exhaust gases emitted by the test  vehicle are diluted in the Mix T or in the dilution tunnel with ambient air at a mean ratio of 1:5 to 1:10, and extracted using a special system of pumps in such a way that the total volumetric flow composed of exhaust gas and dilution air is constant. The admixture of dilution air is therefore dependent on the momentary exhaust gas volumetric flow. A representative sample is continuously extracted from the diluted exhaust gas flow and is collected in one or more exhaust gas sample bags. The sampling volumetric flow is constant during the bag filling phase. Therefore, the pollutant concentration in a sample bag at the end of the filling process is identical to the mean value of the concentration in the diluted exhaust gas during the bag filling process.
While the exhaust gas sample bags are being filled, a sample of the dilution air is taken and collected in one or more air sample bags in order to measure the pollutant concentration in the dilution air. Filling the sample bags generally corresponds to the phases in which the test cycles are divided .
The pollutant mass emitted during the test is calculated from the total volume of the diluted exhaust gas and the pollutant concentrations in the exhaust gas and air sample bags.
Advances in the CVS method Advances in the CVS method Diluting the exhaust gas causes a reduction in pollutant concentrations as a factor of the dilution. The concentrations of some pollutants in certain test phases, since pollutant emissions have been significantly reduced in recent years as emission limits have become more stringent. This poses a problem from the measuring process aspect as the difference in the two values is crucial for the pollutant emissions. A further challenge is presented by the precision of the measuring devices used to analyze the pollutants.
precautions to prevent water from condensing, e.g., by heating sections of the dilution systems, or drying or warming dilution air on vehicles with a gasoline engine.
cluding dilution systems), e.g., by appropriately selecting or preconditioning the materials used and system setups or by using modified electronic components.
Bag Mini Diluter Bag Mini Diluter As an alternative to the improvements in CVS technology described above, a new type of dilution system was developed in the USA: the Bag Mini Diluter . During the test, part of this diluted exhaust gas flow that is proportional to the exhaust gas volumetric flow is filled in exhaust gas sample bags and analyzed at the end of the driving test.
In this procedure, dilution is performed : with a pollutant free zero gas free of pollutants and not with air containing pollutants. This has the purpose of avoiding the air sample bag analysis and the subsequent differential formation of exhaust gas and air sample bag concentrations. However, a more complex procedure is required than that for the CVS method, e.g., one requirement is to determine the exhaust gas volumetric flow and the proportional sample bag filling.
Essentially, the same devices are used to measure the concentrations of gaseous pollutants in the exhaust gas of gasoline engine vehicles as for dieselengine vehicles. There is however a difference in how the hydrocarbon emissions exhaust gas sample bag.
Components Procedure CO, CO2 Non dispersive infrared analyzer Particulate counting
Test bench measuring techniques: NDIR analyzer NDIR analyzer The NDIR  analyzer utilizes the property of certain gases to absorb infrared radiation within a narrow wavelength range. Absorbed radiation is converted to vibration or rotation energy by the absorbing molecules. In turn, this energy can be measured as heat. The phenomenon described occurs in molecules that are formed from atoms of at least two different elements, e.g., CO, CO2, C6H14 or SO2.
There are a number of variants of NDIR analyzers; the main component parts are a source of infrared light , a rotating chopper, and a detector. The detector comprises two chambers connected by a membrane and containing samples of the gas components under analysis. Radiation from the reference cell is absorbed in one chamber and radiation from the cuvette in the other. Radiation from the cuvette may have already been reduced by absorption in the test gas. The difference in radiant energy causes a flow movement that is measured by a flow sensor or a pressure sensor. The rotating chopper interrupts the infrared radiation in cycles, causing the flow movement to change direction and therefore a modulation of the sensor signal.
NDIR analyzers possess strong cross sensitivity to water vapor in the test gas since H2O molecules absorb a wide range of infrared radiation wavelengths. This is the reason why NDIR analyzers are positioned downstream of a test gas treatment system to dry the exhaust gas when they are used to make measurements on undiluted exhaust gas.
Chemiluminescence detector in the test gas.
method 1 Gas outlet, 2 Absorption cell, 3 Test gas inlet, 4 Optical filter, 5 Infrared light source, 6 Infrared radiation, 7 Reference cell, 8 Rotating chopper, 9 Detector.
It is a requirement to measure the NO and : NO2 molecules as the legislation regularizes the emission of the total nitrogen oxides. However, since the test principle of the chemiluminescence detector is limited to measuring the NO concentration, the test gas is channeled through a converter that reduces the nitrogen dioxide to nitrogen monoxide.
Flame Ionization Detector , where carbon radicals are formed and some of these radicals are temporarily ionized. The radicals are discharged at a collector electrode. The current produced is measured and is proportional to the number of carbon atoms in the test gas.
GC FID and Cutter FID There are two generally common methods to measure the methane concentration are used to separate the methane.
Unlike the cutter FID, the GC FID can only determine the CH4 concentration discontinuously .
Paramagnetic detector act on molecules in inhomogeneous magnetic fields. These forces cause the molecules to move. The movement is sensed by a special detector and is proportional to the concentration of molecules in the test gas.
Measuring Measuring particulate emission particulate emission In addition to gaseous pollutants, solid particulates are also measured, as they are also pollutants subject to legislation. Currently, the gravimetric process is the process specified by law to measure particulate emissions.
detector 1 Gas outlet, 2 Collector electrode, 3 Amplifier output, 4 Combustion air, 5 Test gas inlet, 6 Combustion gas , 7 Burner.
Particulate counting: Because of the disadvantages mentioned and the ongoing reduction of the limit values, increasingly the number of emitted particulates will be limited, as well as the particulate emission .
The "Condensation Particulate Counter"  is mixed with saturated butanol vapor. The process of the butanol condensing on the solid particulates causes the particulates to increase dramatically in size so that it is possible to calculate the number of particulates in the aerosol with the aid of scattered light measurement.
The number of particulates in the diluted exhaust gas is continuously calculated; integration of the measured values produces the number of particulates over the driving test.
Determination of particulate size distribution There is increasing interest in acquiring knowledge of the size distribution of particulates in the exhaust gas of a vehicle. Examples of devices that supply this information are the Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer .
Portable emission measuring  devices A PEMS measuring device consists primarily of three components to ensure a complete analysis of the vehicle emissions.
Gas PEMS Gas PEMS Gas analysis apparatus is used to measure the pollutant emissions in the exhaust gas flow. This consists of an NDUV analyzer to measure CO and CO2, and an O2 sensor.
The NDUV analyzer is a multi component UV photometer. The measuring principle is based here essentially on the characteristic attribute of NO and NO2 to absorb luminous radiation in a wavelength range of 200 to 500 nm.
PN PEMS .
Secondly, portable "Diffusion Chargers"  are used to count particulates. The measuring principle is based on the electrostatic precipitation of charged particulates. The particulates are charged by collisions with ions which are created by a gas discharge in a charging chamber in the measuring device. Precipitation of the charged particulates creates a potential difference between the metallic precipitation surface and the surrounding area. It is then possible by means of numerical methods to use this potential difference to determine theoretically the particulate number.
EFM . Here the pressure loss is measured at a defined flow resistance inside the test pipe. The differential pressure can then be used to calculate the volume of exhaust gas.
The EFM is a test pipe mounted on the exhaust tailpipe which contains both pressure and temperature sensors. The sampling point for the gas analysis apparatus and the sampling point for measuring the particulate number are also integrated on this adapter.
Testing commercial vehicles: In the USA the transient test method has been prescribed since model year 1987 for testing the emissions from diesel engines in heavy commercial vehicles over 8,500 lbs .
The transient test method also uses the CVS method. However, the size of the engines demands a test setup with a substantially higher throughput in order to keep to the same dilution ratios as for cars and light duty commercial vehicles.  Double dilution approved by legislators helps to limit the increased complexity of instrumentation. The diluted exhaust gas volumetric flow can be set alternatively using a Roots blower or critical flow venturi nozzles.
Another possibility would be to calculate the particulate emissions with a partial flow dilution system, provided that the remaining pollutants in the undiluted exhaust gas are measured.
With Euro VI limit values for the particulate number are binding on all new model types. The value is 8 1011 particles in steady state and 6 1011 particles per kWh in transient operation.
Diesel smoke emission  test Methods Separate legislation for testing the smoke emissions of diesel engine vehicles came into force long before the introduction of legislation for testing gaseous pollutants. All existing smoke tests are coupled closely with the measuring devices used. One measure of smoke emission is the smoke number.
Two methods are essentially customary for measuring this value. In the absorption method .
Measurement of diesel smoke emissions is relevant only if the engine is under load, since it is only when the engine is operated under load that emission of significant levels of particulates occur. Two different test procedures are also commonly used here. Firstly, measurements under full load, e.g., on a chassis dynamometer, or on a defined test circuit. Secondly, measurements under unrestricted acceleration using a defined throttle burst under the load of the engine flywheel .
As the results of testing for diesel smoke emissions vary according to both test procedure and type of load, they are not generally suitable for direct mutual comparisons.
Opacimeter Exhaust gas opacity denotes the attenuation of light by absorption, diffraction, scatter and reflection on the particulates contained in the exhaust gas.
A transmitter and a photodetector are mounted on the exhaust pipe for measurement of the full flow with the opacimeter. In partial gas devices, the exhaust gas is routed through an exhaust gas sample probe and heated lines by a pump into the
During the unrestricted acceleration part of the exhaust gas is delivered to the measuring chamber. A light beam passes through the measuring chamber now filled with exhaust gas. The attenuation of lights is determined photoelectrically and indicated as opacity T in % or as an absorption coefficient k in m 1 are basic requirements for high levels of accuracy and reproducibility of the measurements.
During testing under load, measurement and display are a continuous process. The opacimeter automatically determines the maximum value and calculates the mean from several gas pulses.
1 Sample probe, 2 Light source, 3 Purge air for calibration, 4 Calibrating valve, 5 Heater,  6 Receiver, 7 Measuring chamber, 8 Electronic analyzer and display, 9 Optical window, 10 Measuring chamber outlet, to pump.
The method has been developed over decades. Thus, the hand pump, for example, was replaced by a continuously operating pump, the dead volume between the sample probe and the filter paper is taken into consideration, and the devices are heated to prevent condensation .
The filter smoke number is defined in ISO 10054 . It corresponds to the Bosch number for an effective suction length of 405 mm at a temperature of 298 K and a pressure of 1 bar.
Evaporative emission test Independently of the combustion pollutants produced in the engine, a gasoline engine vehicle emits additional quantities of hydrocarbons  have regulations which limit these evaporative losses.
Test methods These evaporative emissions are usually quantified with the aid of a hermetically sealed climate chamber, the SHED , with the difference representing the evaporative losses.
system as a result of temperature changes in the course of the day: tank breathing test or diurnal test .
1 Filter paper, 2 Gas passage, 3 Heater, 4 Reflex photometer, 5 Paper transport, 6 Volume measurement, 7 Purge air changeover valves, 8 Pump.
Test procedures Evaporations are measured in several phases during a detailed prescribed test procedure. After the vehicle has undergone preconditioning including preparation of the activated charcoal canister ad with the tank filled to the defined level of 40 %, testing starts.
First test: First test: Hot soak losses is simulated inside the hermetically sealed climate chamber. The hydrocarbons emitted by the vehicle under these conditions are then collected.
In the USA, both a 2 day diurnal test , where the preconditioning runs in each case slightly differently. The aim of the 3 day diurnal test is to check the sufficient capacity of the activated carbon canister. The 2 day diurnal test serves to check whether the activated carbon canister was sufficiently purged during the preconditioning preceding this test.
EU legislation from Euro 3 provided for a 24 hour test. For Euro 6d the test procedure was revised and a new test cycle WLTC, a 48 hour diurnal test and further tests for checking durability were added. Before the test procedure the activated carbon canister is to be aged according to a defined process. For further information, see Emission control legislation.
Third test: Running losses Third test: Running losses The running loss test is conducted prior to the hot soak test. It is used to assess the hydrocarbon emissions generated during vehicle operation in the prescribed test cycles .
Limits EU legislation EU legislation The total of the measurement results from the first and second days of the 48 hour diurnal test, the hot soak tests and a double so called permeation factor measured in an upstream procedure produces the evaporative losses. The tank is checked in a separate test procedure with regard to permeation emissions. The factor calculated from this has a bearing of the final calculation of the evaporative emissions. This total must lie below the demanded limit value of 2 g of evaporated hydrocarbons for all the measurements.
These limits must be adhered to over 120,000 miles .
For PC , which are certified in accordance with the CARB ZEV legislation, a lower limit value in the SHED test
"rig test", i.e., a setup of tank, fuel lines, activated carbon canister, and engine by arrangement between CARB and the vehicle manufacturer.
With LEV III . The durability requirement is 150,000 miles.
China China China has adopted up to and including Stage 5 the EU requirements for limiting evaporative emissions. With China 6a  is 0.7 g HC.
Refueling emissions Refueling test Refueling test In the refueling test the HC emissions when refueling are measured in order to monitor evaporation of the fuel vapors displaced during refueling . In the USA, this test applies to both CARB and EPA.
Spitback test Spitback test In the spitback test, the quantity of fuel splashed out during each refueling operation is measured. The tank must be refueled to at least 85 % of its total volume . The spitback test does not have to be carried out in the refueling test; instead, a declaration that the vehicle meets the requirements of the spitback test is sufficient.
 ISO 10054: Internal combustion compression ignition engines Measurement apparatus for smoke from engines operating under steady state conditions Filter type smokemeter .
The rise in the sheer amount of electron : ics in the vehicle, the use of software to control the vehicle, and the increased complexity of modern electronic systems place high demands on the diagnostic concept, monitoring in driving mode , and workshop diagnostics.
As emission control legislation becomes more and more stringent and continuous monitoring in driving mode is now called for, lawmakers have now  acknowledged on board diagnostics as an aid to monitoring exhaust gas emissions, and have produced manufacturer independent standardization. This additional system is termed the OBD system .
Monitoring in driving mode The diagnosis integrated in the control unit is a basic feature of electronic engine management systems. Besides a selftest of the control unit, input and output signals, and control unit intercommunication are monitored.
an external offboard tester for further selective troubleshooting and fault localization Te st lin es Offboard tester Diagnosis tester OBD connector OBD interface
which is detected redundantly with different sensors .
Monitoring of internal ECU functions Monitoring functions are implemented in control unit hardware . Many tests are performed immediately after switch on. Further monitoring functions are repeated at regular intervals during normal operation so that component failure can also be detected during operation. Test procedures that require a high amount of computing capacity, or which cannot be performed during vehicle operation for other reasons, are carried out in the after run after "engine off". This avoids impacting the other functions. An example of such a function is the checksum check of the flash EPROM.
Monitoring ECU communication Communication with the other control units normally takes place over the CAN bus. Control mechanisms for error detection are incorporated in the CAN protocol so that transmission errors can be detected in the CAN chip already. The control unit also runs a variety of other tests. Since the majority of CAN messages are sent at regular intervals by the individual control units, the failure of a CAN controller in a control unit is detectable by checking these regular intervals. If redundant information is stored in the control unit, all input signals are checked against this information.
A healing or "restored signal recognition" feature is available during driving mode for most errors. The signal path must be detected as intact for a specific period of time for this purpose.
Error/fault storage Error/fault storage All faults are stored as a fault code in the non volatile area of the data memory. The fault code also describes the fault type . Each fault code input is accompanied by additional information, e.g. the operating con 
Limp home functions Limp home functions If a fault is detected, limp home strategies can be triggered in addition to substitute values , and minimize exhaust gas emissions.
On board diagnostics The engine system and components must be continuously monitored in driving mode so that compliance with the emission limits required by law can be achieved in everyday use. Therefore, starting in California, regulations were adopted to monitor exhaust gas related systems and components. This has standardized and expanded manufacturer specific on board diagnostics  with respect to the monitoring of emission related components and systems .
OBD I must also be in place to provide a readout of which component has malfunctioned.
OBD II in the event of a malfunction. In addition, all components used to monitor emission related components or which affect the diagnosis result must be monitored.
Normally, the diagnostic functions for all components and systems under surveillance must run at least once during the exhaust gas test cycle .
The OBD II legislation furthermore : prescribes standardization of the fault memory information and access to the information , e.g.
OBD II expansions OBD II expansions From model year 2004 The law has been revised several times since OBD II was introduced. The legal requirements are generally revised by the authorities every two years .
From model year 2007 through 2013 for gasoline passenger cars New requirements for gasoline engines are essentially the diagnosis of cylinder individual mixture trimming with SCR catalytic converter. Thus, to be monitored are, for example, the regeneration frequency in the particulate filter and the dosing quantity of the NOx reducing agent in the SCR dosing system.
One of the new requirements for diesel systems since 2009 is that, as well as the regulators, controlled functions where they are relevant to exhaust gas are to be monitored as well. Likewise, the monitoring of cold start functions is subject to extended requirements.
From model year 2014/2015 Enhanced requirements have already been formulated for model year 2015 for individual components in diesel passenger cars, light commercial vehicles, and general commercial vehicles. These relate to the monitoring of the oxidation catalytic converter for "feedgas" , and to the monitoring of the injection system for quantity encoded  injectors. Likewise, in the course of the revision of the LEV III emission legislation some requirements pertaining to hybrid vehicles were defined more precisely with an impact on the IUMPR calculation.
ues as multiples of the emission limit . For the first time an OBD threshold value was also de 
Euro VI A   NOx control system:   SCR reagent   NOx: 0.46 g/kWh 1 For gasoline direct injection.
fined for the particulate matter for gaso : line engines from model year 2019 at a fixed value of 17.5 mg per mile. Further new requirements are, for example, the output of characteristics for assessing the use and activation of "Active off cycle technologies" and fuel consumption specific quantities from model year 2019, improved monitoring of the crankcase breather lines from model year 2023, and specification of a multitude of diagnostic requirements for components of hybrid vehicles.
Scope of application Scope of application The previously presented OBD regulations for the CARB and apply to all passenger vehicles with up to 12 seats as well as small commercial vehicles up to 14,000 lbs .
The current CARB OBD II legislation for California is at present also in force in some other US states. Furthermore, other US states are planning to adopt this legislation in future.
EPA OBD Laws enforced by the EPA . Within the framework of revising the Tier 3 emission legislation, from model year 2017 the EPA OBD requirements were adapted to the CARB OBD requirements. A CARB certificate is already recognized now by the EPA.
EOBD .
In 2007 and 2008 new EOBD requirements were adopted for gasoline and diesel passenger cars within the framework of the Euro 5 and Euro 6 emission and OBD legislation .
applied with unchanged OBD threshold values compared with Euro 5. A significant functional requirement with regard to EOBD is the additional monitoring of the three way catalytic converter for NOx. For diesel passenger car engines, Euro 5 involved a reduction of the OBD threshold values for particulate matter, CO and NOx. In addition, there are extended requirements with regard to the monitoring of the exhaust gas recirculation system is subject to very stringent requirements. Functional monitoring of the particulate filter is mandatory, irrespective of the untreated emissions.
tems are governed by tighter regulations for monitoring the oxidation catalytic converter and the NOx exhaust gas treatment system .
From September 2017 the NEDC is being replaced by the WLTC with Euro 6d temp for the Type 1 emission test . Here the emission limits as well as the OBD threshold values have not been adapted, but rather adopted unchanged. With regard to the OBD test the vehicle manufacturer can choose whether the die OBD threshold value check is carried out on the basis of the NEDC or the WLTC. This right to choose will only exist until the end of 2021. From this point on, the OBD threshold values will exclusively be checked on the basis of the WLTC.
China OBD In December 2016 the MEP . The OBD requirements from 07/2020 will also apply unchanged to stage CN6b. While the previous Chinese legislation was geared very closely towards the European standard, the new CN6 law combines elements of the EU and US legislation and some country specific new requirements. With regard to OBD, the requirements are based to the greatest possible extent on US requirements of the legislation from 2013, where some requirements have been removed or simplified and others have been enhanced. While the actual OBD requirements are geared towards the US standard, the European OBD threshold values for Euro 6 2 and the European test cycle WLTC have on the other hand been adopted.
Other countries Some other countries have adopted different stages of the EU or the US OBD legislation .
OBD system requirements The engine control unit must use suitable measures to monitor all on board systems and components whose malfunction may cause a deterioration in exhaust gas test specifications stipulated by law. A malfunction must be displayed to the driver by means of the malfunction indicator lamp if a fault results in an excess in OBD threshold values.
Functional requirements Functional requirements All exhaust gas related systems and components must, within the framework of On Board Diagnostics required by law, be monitored for malfunctions and for exceeded exhaust gas threshold values.
Legislation demands the monitoring of electrical functions . The extensive functional test provides more detailed information about system operability and also identifies if necessary the quantitative influence of
defective components on emissions. As : a result, the limits of adaptation must be monitored when monitoring adaptive fuel injection functions .
Malfunction indicator lamp Malfunction indicator lamp The malfunction indicator lamp , also called the warning lamp, informs the driver that a component has malfunctioned. When a malfunction is detected, the CARB and the EPA stipulate that it must light up no later than after one driving cycle of its occurrence. In the area where EOBD applies, it must light up no later than the third driving schedule after the fault was detected.
If the malfunction disappears .
Communication with the Communication with the scan tool scan tool The OBD legislation prescribes standardization of the fault memory information and access to the information .
Vehicle repair Vehicle repair Any workshop can use a scan tool to read out emission related fault information from the control unit. This permits even non franchised workshops to carry out repairs.
Manufacturers are obliged to provide the required tools and information , for a suitable fee, to ensure that repairs can be carried out with the correct degree of expertise. Switch on conditions Switch on conditions The diagnostic functions are only executed if the physical switch on conditions are fulfilled. These include, for example, torque thresholds, engine temperature thresholds, and engine speed thresholds or limits.
Inhibit conditions Inhibit conditions Diagnostic functions and engine functions cannot always operate simultaneously. There are inhibit conditions that prohibit the performance of certain functions. For instance, tank ventilation  in the gasoline engine cannot function while catalytic converter diagnosis is in operation. In the diesel engine the hotfilm air mass meter can only be monitored satisfactorily if the exhaust gas recirculation valve is closed.
Temporary interruption of diagnostic Temporary interruption of diagnostic functions functions Diagnostic capabilities may only be disabled under certain conditions in order to prevent false diagnosis. Examples of such conditions are high elevation , during engine starting low ambient temperature, or low battery voltage.
Readiness codes Readiness codes When the fault memory is checked, it is important to know that the diagnostic functions have run at least once. This can be checked by reading out the readiness codes over the diagnostics interface. These readiness codes are set for the most important monitored components on completion of the relevant diagnoses required by law.
trally when faults are detected whether they are the cause or a consequential fault. As well as central validation there are also systems with decentralized validation, i.e. validation is performed in the diagnostic function.
Vehicle recall Vehicle recall If vehicles fail to comply with OBD requirements by law, the authorities may demand the vehicle manufacturer to start a recall at their own cost.
 requirements and the diagnostic concept of the authority/agency presented.
Other emission related components and systems refer to components and systems not mentioned in this list that, if they malfunction, may cause the exhaust gas emissions to be increased  . Minimum values must be maintained with regard to the frequency of diagnostic functions. Examples of OBD functions Catalytic converter diagnosis Catalytic converter diagnosis Gasoline system This diagnostic function monitors the conversion efficiency of the three way catalytic converter. This is measured by the catalytic converter's oxygen retention capability. Monitoring is performed by observing the signals from the l oxygen sensors in reaction to a specific alteration of the setpoint value of the l closed loop control.
Additionally, the NOx storage capacity  must be assessed for the NOx storage catalytic converter. For this purpose, the actual NOx accumulator content resulting from consumption of the reduction agent during regeneration of the catalytic converter is compared with an expected value.
Diesel system In the diesel system, carbon monoxide .
The storage and regeneration capacity of the NOx storage catalytic converter is monitored. The monitoring functions run based on loading and regeneration models, and the measured regeneration duration. This requires the use of l or NOx sensors.
The SCR DeNOx catalytic converter is monitored using efficiency diagnostics. NOx sensors located before and after the catalytic converter are required for this purpose. The components of the dosing system and the quantity and dosing of the reducing agent are monitored separately.
Tank leak diagnosis Tank leak diagnosis Gasoline system Tank leak diagnosis detects evaporation from the fuel system that may cause an increase in HC values, in particular. EOBD is limited to simply testing the electrical control circuit of the tank pressure sensor and the canister purge valve . In the USA, on the other hand, it must be possible to detect leaks in the fuel system. There are two different methods of doing this.
The low pressure method observes the tank pressure and first tests its operability by deliberately actuating the tank ventilation and carbon canister check valves. A conclusion can then be drawn on the leak size using the time curve of the tank pressure again by deliberately actuating the valves.
The overpressure method uses a diagnosis module with an integrated electrically powered vane pump that can be used to pump up the tank system. The flow from the pump is high when the tank is hermetically sealed. A conclusion can then be drawn on leak size by evaluating the flow from the pump.
Particulate filter diagnosis : Particulate filter diagnosis Diesel system The diesel particulate filter is currently monitored for the most part for filter breakage, removal, or blockage. A differential pressure sensor is used to measure the pressure differential at a specific volumetric flow. The measured value can be used to verify whether the filter is defective. An extended function uses load models to monitor the efficiency of the particulate filter.
Since model year 2010 the regeneration frequency has also had to be monitored. Since model year 2013 a particulate sensor has been used to monitor the particulate filter in response to tightened OBD requirements in the USA. The particulate sensor can also be detected with the particulate sensor.
Exhaust gas recirculation system Exhaust gas recirculation system  diagnosis  diagnosis Diesel system In the exhaust gas recirculation system  the regulator, the exhaust gas recirculation valve, the exhaust gas cooler, and other individual components are monitored.
Functional system monitoring is performed by air mass regulators and position controllers. They check for permanent control variances. An excessively high or low EGR throughflow must be detected. System response must also be monitored.
The EGR cooler is monitored by means of additional temperature measurement after the cooler and with model values. This allows the cooler efficiency to be calculated.
Comprehensive components Comprehensive components On board diagnostics requires that all sensors have to be monitored.
these are faults that are inherent in the components themselves , or which may be caused by shunts, for instance. Monitoring is carried out by a plausibility check on the sensor signals, either by using a model or directly by other sensors.
1 Sensor curve, 2 Upper threshold for "Signal Range Check", 3 Upper threshold for "Out of Range Check", 4 Lower threshold for "Out of Range Check", 5 Lower threshold for "Signal Range Check", 6 Plausibility check "Rationality Check". 1 2 3 4 5 6 Voltage Physical quantity 6
Actuators must be monitored for electri : cal faults and if technically possible also for function. Functional monitoring means that, when a control command  in a suitable way by using information from the system.
The actuators to be monitored include all output stages, the throttle valve, the exhaust gas recirculation valve, the variable turbine geometry of the exhaust gas turbocharger, the swirl flap, the injectors, the glow plugs .
OBD requirements for heavy commercial vehicles Europe For commercial vehicles, the first stage of On Board Diagnostics was introduced in the EU . A new OBD regulation came into force together with Euro VI in 2013.
Additional requirements Additional requirements Since November 2006 it has been required to monitor the NOx control systems for correct operation. The systems are monitored for their own emission limits, which are more stringent than the OBD threshold values.
SCR system The aim is to ensure that the systems are supplied with the correct reagent . The availability of the reagent must be monitored by way of the tank fill level. To check the correct quality, it is necessary to monitor the NOx emissions either with an exhaust gas sensor or alternatively via a quality sensor. In the latter case, it is also necessary to monitor for correct reagent consumption.
Monitoring of NOx control systems Faults in NOx control systems must be permanently stored . Engine power must be throttled if the NOx OBD  threshold value is exceeded or if the urea tank is empty.
Euro VI Euro VI The OBD part of the Euro VI regulation is based on the Global Technical Regulation .
In addition, emission limits and OBD threshold values as well as the choice of test cycles are established by way of the national regulations.
and particulate matter . For particulate filter monitoring a functional, non emission correlated diagnosis is possible as an alternative to OBD threshold value diagnosis.
and Euro VI B: Tightened NOx OBD threshold value and tightening of the NOx control system requirements for SCR reagent quality and consumption monitoring. Monitoring is performed with regard to the long term drift behavior of the fuel injectors. Monitoring of the OBD diagnostic frequency rate is mandatory.
Required diagnoses from WWH OBD These diagnoses are compulsory for particulate filter, SCR catalytic converter, NOx storage catalytic converter, oxidation catalytic converter, exhaust gas recirculation, fuel injection system, charge air pressure system, variable valve control, cooling system, exhaust gas sensors, idle control system, and components.
Required diagnoses outside the WWH OBD scope For the particulate filter, the exhaust gas recirculation system and the charge air pressure control system no exceptions are permitted in monitoring for specific diagnoses. The relevant faults must not be defined as Class C.
Fundamentally the definition of the non emission correlated "performance monitors" in WWH OBD has been changed. In Euro VI these diagnoses must be demonstrated with emission correlation for the first certification of an engine from an engine family.
Gas engines Gas engines are covered by specific monitoring requirements with regard to compliance with the l setpoint value, to NOx and CO conversion of the three way catalytic converter, and to the l sensor. Furthermore, catalytic converter damaging combustion miss detection is required.
Requirements with regard to NOx control systems For SCR systems, monitoring of the reagent tank fill level, of the reagent quality, of reagent consumption, and of dosage interruption is required.
Detected faults in the NOx control system result in a reduction in stages of  vehicle drivability. Torque limitation as the first stage is followed by vehicle speed limitation to crawling speed as the second stage.
USA CARB, model year 2007 CARB, model year 2007 In California "Engine Manufacturer Diagnostics" has been called on for heavy commercial vehicles since model year 2007. This can be viewed as a precursor to an OBD regulation. EMD calls for the monitoring of all components and of exhaust gas recirculation.
Model year 2010 and following Model year 2010 and following With model year 2010 an OBD system as for passenger car OBD II was introduced. The technical requirements are at the same level as the respective requirements for passenger cars.
Differences ensue due to the fact that commercial vehicles are subject to engine certification. All the emission limits and OBD threshold values apply here to engine cycles. The absolutely applicable values are scaled with the work performed in the cycle.
In contrast to passenger car LEV III, a new emission regulation  is not planned for commercial vehicles. The OBD threshold values for NOx and NMHC thus remain unchanged, i.e. separate, for commercial vehicles.
Time frame for introducing OBD Time frame for introducing OBD  requirements requirements Model year 2010 A performance variant of a manufacturer's top selling engine family must be equipped with an OBD system. The other performance variants of this engine family are covered by a simplified certification procedure.
Model year 2013: An engine family of a manufacturer must be equipped in all the performance variants with an OBD system. Furthermore, an OBS system is required in each case for a performance variant in every engine family. The other performance variants of these engine families are covered by a simplified certification procedure.
Japan Japan has had its own OBD regulation for commercial vehicles in force since 2004. The requirements are comparable in terms of content with EMD in California for model year 2007.
China China VI has applied in China since 2020; this is based on Euro VI and additionally imposes some further requirements that also relate to OBD.
Other countries Further countries have in the meantime introduced OBD for commercial vehicles. These include India, Korea, Australia, Brazil, and Russia. These countries have adopted EU regulations in this regard .
On board diagnostics for : motorcycles While there have hitherto been no OBD requirements for motorcycles in the USA, OBD is being introduced in three stages in the EU. Emission stage Euro 4 as from 2016 saw the introduction of OBD I, which requires the monitoring of electrical faults for emission relevant sensors and actuators. Which diagnoses of electrical faults are required is dependent on the component. The additional requirements such as fault detection and fault storage, MIL activation, scan tool communication, etc. conform to the EOBD passenger car requirements.
With emission stage Euro 5 as from 2020 OBD I will be extended to include plausibility checks for sensors and function checks for actuators. The diagnostic range is dependent on the component. It will furthermore be necessary to monitor for faults which lead to a reduction of the maximum torque by more than 10 %. At the same time OBD II requirements as for EOBD apply as well. Catalytic converter diagnosis is excluded. The detection of  misfires on motorcycles is covered by engine speed load ranges. The functional IUPR requirements must be satisfied, but without prescribed minimum ratios. From 2024 reduced OBD threshold values will reply; furthermore, catalytic converter diagnosis is prescribed and a minimum ratio of 0.1 will apply to all diagnoses. The first OBD I stage was carried over to UN GTR 18, which alternatively also provides for reduced scopes. The carryover of OBD I stage 2 and of OBD II in Amendment 1 to UN GTR 18 took place in 2020. India introduced EU OBD I from 4/2020 and is expected to introduce EU OBD II from 4/2023. Discussions are being held as to whether the OBD II stage is, as in the EU, to be split into two stages.  Japan introduced its own OBD I with a similar scope to EU OBD I in 2016. A further stage OBD II is to be based on the previously mentioned UN GTR OBD II.
ECU diagnostics and Service : Information System Function The function of diagnostics in the workshop is to locate quickly and reliably the smallest replaceable defective unit. In modern vehicles it is essential to use a generally PC based diagnostic tester. Diagnostics in the workshop utilizes the results of diagnostics conducting in driving mode , employing special workshop diagnostic modules in the vehicle ECU or diagnostic tester and additional test and measuring equipment. These diagnostic options are integrated in the diagnostic tester in prompted troubleshooting.
Prompted troubleshooting The main element of workshop diagnostics is the prompted troubleshooting procedure. The workshop employee is guided, starting out from the fault pattern or from the fault memory entry, through the relevant diagnostic steps. The choice and order of the diagnostic steps is dynamic and depends on the result of the previous diagnostic step. The diagnostic results contain the use of test equipment, additional sensors or workshop diagnostic modules.
Symptoms Symptoms Faulty vehicle behavior can be either perceived directly by the driver or documented by way of a fault memory entry. At the beginning of fault diagnosis the workshop employee must identify the existing symptom as the starting point for prompted troubleshooting.
Fault memory entries Fault memory entries All the faults that occur during driving are stored in the fault memory together with defined ambient conditions prevailing at the time of their occurrence, and can be read out via an interface protocol. This protocol is based on one of the established standards and is generally extended to include manufacturer specific components. The fault memory can also be deleted with the diagnostic tester.
Additional test equipment and sensors Additional test equipment and sensors The diagnostic options in the workshop are expanded by using additional sensors . In the event of a fault detected in the workshop, the equipment is adapted to the vehicle. The measurement results are generally evaluated by the diagnostic tester.
Workshop diagnostic modules Workshop diagnostic modules All the workshop diagnostic modules can be used only when a diagnostic tester is connected and generally only when the vehicle is stationary. The operating conditions are monitored in the ECU. These diagnostic modules integrated in the ECU, after being started by the diagnostic tester, run completely autarkically in the ECU and on completion signal the result back to the diagnostic tester. ECU based workshop diagnostic modules differ from simple actuator tests with acoustic feedback in that they can place the vehicle to be diagnosed in the workshop into as a rule no load operating points, excite actuators depending on the boundary conditions set, and independently evaluate the result via sensor values with an evaluator logic circuit. Examples of such modules are the high pressure test as system test for the diesel injection system .
Tester based diagnostic modules Tester based diagnostic modules The functional sequence and evaluation are executed in the case of tester based diagnostic modules in the diagnostic  tester, where the measurement data used for evaluation are determined with the aid of the ECU by sensors in the vehicle or by additional test sensors.
The performance of the tester based diagnostic modules is dependent on the released interfaces in the engine ECU and the data transfer between engine ECU and tester. On the other hand, high flexibility
is also possible after series introduction : since new diagnostic modules can also be used thanks to a simple update of the tester software. Selective diagnostics is therefore possible when field problems occur.
Further contents of fault finding Further contents of fault finding  instructions instructions The fault finding instructions also include function descriptions, electrical terminal diagrams, installation positions for components, read outs of actual values, and actuator diagnostics.
 ISO 27145: Road vehicles Implementation of World Wide Harmonized On Board Diagnostics .
 UN/ECE Regulation No. 83, Revision 5: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to the emission of pollutants according to engine fuel requirements.
Steps: Start test Cutout of individual cylinder Quantity jump Measure maximum speed Repeat with further cylinders Diagnostic result.
diesel injection system Detection of leaks in the high pressure system and efficiency of high pressure generation. Steps: Start test Increase setpoint pressure Measure pressure build up time Reduce setpoint pressure Measure pressure  reduction time Variation of engine speed and pressure Measure pressure reduction time with engine stopped at end of test  Diagnostic results.
Overview: Definition Aside from the drive , ride comfort, and driving safety.
Because of the many and sometimes contrary requirements imposed on a vehicle between the conflicting priorities of driving dynamics, ride comfort, and driving safety, the design and tuning of a chassis are subject to high levels of complexity. UFG0059 1Y 1 12 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 11 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Bild 1: Fahrwerkskomponenten eines Elektrofahrzeugs  1 Double wishbone front axle, 2 Two axle pneumatic suspension with electronically controlled  vibration damper, 3 Actuator contiguous wheel slip limitation for two driving engines,  4 Front axle support stiffening plate, 5 Integrated braking system, 6 Polygonal steering wheel,  7 Rolling resistanceand acoustics optimized 22" tires with foam insert,  8 Two axle pneumatic suspension with electronically controlled vibration damper,  9 Bearing, rear axle support, 10 Functional five link rear axle with double acoustic isolation  of drive unit, 11 Actuator contiguous wheel slip limitation for two driving engines, 12 Integral active steering, 13 Anti roll bar with highly pretensioned anti roll bar mounts,  14 Steering with variable rack geometry and acoustic isolation, 15 17" sport brake,  16 Air Performance wheels, 17 Electric steering column adjustment,  18 Compression strut connecting rear chassis section with rear axle support,  19 Anti roll bar with highly pretensioned anti roll bar mounts,  20 17" sport brake.
Functions of the chassis The fundamental function of the chassis is to move the car by transmitting the drive torque to the roadway. The driver influences the horizontal movement by steering; in the process, the vehicle should hold its course and allow the driver to guide the vehicle safely and comfortably.
The vertical movement of the vehicle is determined by the course of the road and road surface irregularities, which excite vibrations. The chassis decisively determines these vibration effects occurring during driving in the longitudinal, lateral, and vertical vehicle directions. The function of the chassis is to reduce these vibrations in as controlled a manner as possible. It is essential to avoid as far as possible the transmission of these vibrations to the vehicle body so as to reduce rolling, yawing, and pitching and to prevent the bonanza effect .
A dynamically well tuned chassis enables the driver to drive comfortably and safely because it implements the driver's inputs precisely. The driver can safely keep on top of or avoid entirely critical situations.
Lightweight construction The chassis has a substantial influence on the weight. But the lightweight construction of the chassis components also plays a significant role in that the entire unsprung mass of the vehicle is located in the chassis. The lower unsprung mass of the chassis influences vehicle  handling in a positive way; the lower it is, the less the wheel vibrations affect the body. This reduces disturbance variables and as a result increases driving safety and ride comfort.
active components, sensors for monitoring and calculating the driving condition, and intelligent control approaches open up a multitude of new possibilities for influencing relevant chassis properties in response to specific situations. These possibilities for the individual subsystems will also be addressed in greater detail in the following.
Basic principles: Dynamic behavior of a vehicle Vertical movement Vertical movement The roads normally used by motor vehicles feature irregularities that cover a frequency range of up to around 30 Hz and are the most intensive source of excitation in the vehicle. The resulting excitation leads to vertical movements . Driving safety increases with decreasing effective wheel load fluctuations, comfort increases with decreasing effective body accelerations.
Influencing the vehicle dynamics Influencing the vehicle dynamics The dynamics of the vehicle response, however, are not exclusively determined by the chassis system components, but rather are much more a consequence of the combination of different overall vehicle parameters. As a rule, influencing the vehicle dynamics with measures on the chassis system involves high complexity, in particular because the effects of parameter variations have to prevail among the conflicting priorities of driving safety and ride comfort.
Driving safety Driving safety depends decisively on the contact relationships between the tires and the road surface, and thus on the longitudinal and lateral forces that can be transferred. A fundamental aim in chassis configuration with regard to driving safety is therefore always to minimize the dynamic wheel load fluctuations that cause a reduction in the level of force that can be transferred.
Ride comfort The ride comfort, on the other hand, depends on the movements and accelerations that affect the occupants . Depending on the area of application, comfort is of great relevance and should in no way be regarded merely as a concomitant of system development. In the case of professional drivers in particular, adequately high ride comfort is to be ensured in order to prevent long term damage to health. The effective value of the body acceleration has proven to be a good evaluation parameter in this context.
kA Spring constant, cA Dampening rate, S  Sports car, conventionally configured, passive, L Sedan, conventionally configured, passive, AF Active chassis, controlled.
UFF0237 1E kA kA cA Wheel L S cA AF Body a b Driving safety increases Relative effective wheel load fluctuations Comfort increases Effective body acceleration 1
Alongside the adaptation of the oscillatory system to the external road excitations, vehicles also require the influence of internal sources of excitation on the vibration characteristics  to be minimized .
Knowledge and a description in the form of objective variables of the road excitation that causes vibrations are required in order to examine the vibration characteristics and to configure the suspension/shock absorber system of a chassis. Whereas minor irregularities can already be compensated for by the suspension characteristics of the tire, an element between the wheels and body that changes its length is required to reduce greater body movements. Steel springs are used most frequently here, delivering a return force that depends on the change in length. The result is taking account of the wheel and body masses a system that can vibrate and requires other elements for damping.
Body springs and body dampers are traditionally used for these tasks. Coupled with kinematics and elastokinematics in the wheel suspension that are configured in line with requirements, these are intended to ensure optimal power transmission between the tires and road surfaces and, simultaneously, high levels of comfort. Sportier or comfortable tuning of the chassis can be achieved with passive elements, as the conflict diagram in  Figure 2 shows. This conflict of aims can be resolved to a large extent by the use of active or adjustable characteristic springs and dampers.
However, with the increasing use of actuators in the chassis area . In addition, the technical and economic synergy potentials in overall vehicle networking can be increased significantly and the differentiation potential of various derivatives can be enhanced using the same electronic and software modules. This means that electronics and software are becoming increasingly important in the area of chassis systems as complexity increases.
vibration characteristics Design parameters Effects in the low frequency range Body data Spring constant Body natural frequency and body acceleration drop radically when the spring rigidity is reduced Body acceleration drops slightly on  reduction of the spring rigidity Body acceleration remains  virtually constant on reduction of the spring rigidity Dampening rate Body acceleration rises radically on reduction  of the dampening rate Body acceleration drops radically on reduction of the dampening rate Dynamic wheel load fluctuation rises radically on reduction of the dampening rate Tire data Spring constant Natural frequency and amplitude remain  approximately constant Natural frequency and amplitude of the body acceleration and wheel load fluctuations drop approximately proportionally to the reduction in vertical wheel spring rigidity Dampening rate Natural frequency and amplitude remain  approximately constant Amplitude of the body acceleration and wheel load fluctuation drops slightly with increasing damping at consistent wheel natural frequency
gine, and transmission and the suspension linkage i.e., axle, steering, wheels, and tires. The motion of the body can generally be described as a rigid body. Even in the bodies of convertibles, deviations from rigid body motion only occur above the frequency range of 10 to 15 Hz.
describe vehicle handling in the important frequency range up to approx. 8 Hz. Many of these characteristics are described in the standards ISO 8855  .
Wheelbase Wheelbase The wheelbase l according to ISO 612  is the distance between the wheel contact points of the front and rear wheels.
A long wheelbase delivers a lower pitch behavior and thereby facilitates better ride comfort. At the same time a long wheelbase reduces the yaw velocity which is generated by predefined wheel steering angle. A short wheelbase on the other hand delivers better maneuverability . The ratio of wheelbase to vehicle length is in the range of 0.6 to 0.7. A ratio of approximately 0.7 is established for small vehicles. Track width Track width The track width s is the distance between the wheel contact points of the wheels on one axle.
A wide track width generally results in better handling and greater ride comfort. The drawbacks of a wider vehicle are the greater weight and the higher aerodynamic drag. Typical values for the ratio of track width to vehicle width are in the range of 0.80 to 0.86.
Wheel load Wheel load The wheel load is the force acting on the wheel contact point between the roadway and the wheel vertically to the roadway. When the vehicle is stationary on a level surface the sum total of the wheel loads is equal to the force due to weight of the complete vehicle.
Axle load distribution Axle load distribution The axle load distribution specifies the ratio of the axle loads on the front and rear axles with regard to the total vehicle mass. For traction reasons on vehicles with frontwheel drive the axle load is 55 % on the front axle and accordingly 45 % on the rear axle. For rear wheel drives the ratio can be established at 50:50.
Characteristics of the wheel  suspension The front wheels have two degrees of freedom, i.e., the degree of freedom for compression and rebound and that for steering. The rear wheels generally only have the one degree of freedom for compression and rebound. In the case of vehicles with four wheel steering, the rear wheels also have the degree of freedom for steering. These degrees of freedom are defined by the kinematics and elastokinematics of the axle. Kinematics of the axle is the pure rigid body motion of the individual suspension arms, while elastokinematics describes the behavior of the axle in response to the effect of forces and moments. The characteristics of the wheel suspension are described in the following.
Toe angle Toe angle Moving the steering wheel causes the two front wheels to turn in the same direction. This alters the toe angle of the right and left wheels . In the case of a positive turn, i.e., in the counterclockwise direction about the wheel's z axis, the toe angle is also positive.
The difference between the toe angles can amount to several degrees with the steering wheel angle at maximum. When viewed geometrically, the toe angle of the
a b 2 3 2 1 g g 1 UAF0125Y Chassis systems 1115 inside wheel is greater than the toe angle of the outside wheel.
Axle steering angle .
Toe in and Toe in and toe out toe out When the steering wheel is in the straightahead position, the toe angles of the front wheels are in the dynamically advantageous range of 0.1 to 0.3deg. When the distance of the rim flanges ahead of the wheel centers is smaller than that of the rim flanges after the wheel centers, this is referred to as wheel toe in .
The terms toe in and toe out are also used to refer to a single wheel. In this case, toe in means that the wheel has a toe angle in the direction of the vehicle center plane and toe out that it has a toe angle against the direction of the vehicle center plane. Camber angle Camber angle The camber angle g is the angle between the vehicle center plane and the wheel center plane when projected onto the z y plane. The camber angle is positive when the wheels are further away from the  vehicle center plane at the top than at the bottom . The preceding sign is determined according to the rectangular right handed system. If the vehicle center plane is perpendicular to the road surface, both definitions of the camber angle are equal in terms of amount. Otherwise, it is important to observe the precise definition.
Transverse pole Transverse pole When the axle is subjected to compression and rebound the position of the wheels is determined primarily by the kinematics and elastokinematics. The wheel moves transversally to the direction of travel about the transverse pole . The speeds for
S Center of gravity, WV Roll pole, front axle, WH Roll pole, rear axle,  s Track width, l Wheelbase, hWV Roll pole height, front axle, hWH Roll pole height, rear axle.
The height of the roll pole is typically below 120 mm. In order in the case of high lateral accelerations to avoid the support effect i.e., the jacking effect the height of the roll pole decreases with compression.
Roll axis Roll axis The connection between the roll pole of the front axle and the roll pole of the rear axle is called the roll axis . The center of gravity of the body is usually above the roll axis. Center of gravity heights for sedans range between 550 and 650 mm. This roll axis applies for lower lateral accelerations. In the case of higher lateral accelerations, both the suspension adjustment and the axle behavior must be taken into consideration. The roll axis is then not inevitably in the vehicle center plane.
during compression not along the z axis but along the direction which was rotated about the longitudinal inclination at wheel center relative to the z axis. The speeds at the wheel contact point are during compression and rebound perpendicular on the connecting line to the longitudinal pole. The position of the longitudinal pole can change during compression and rebound. The angle between the connection of the wheel contact
Figure 10: Longitudinal pole, anti lift angle : and anti dive angle L Longitudinal pole, hV Longitudinal pole height, front, eV Longitudinal inclination at wheel center, eBV Anti dive angle, front, eAV Anti lift angle, front, uRAP Speed at wheel contact point, uRMP Speed at wheel center.
S N eBV eBV,opt eBH,opt eBH    hV hH h LV LH FxH DFz DFz FxV F Chassis systems 1117 point to the longitudinal pole and the road is called the anti dive angle eB. The angle between the connection of the wheel center to the longitudinal pole and the parallel line to the road is called the anti lift angle eA. The longitudinal pole of the front axle is behind the front wheels and the longitudinal pole of the rear axle is in front of the rear wheels .
1 _____   h __ l , with wheelbase l and height of center of gravity h.
t nt 2 1 nv UAF0126 1E 1118 Chassis systems Pitch pole Pitch pole The two connecting lines between the wheel contact points and the longitudinal pole intersect at the pitch pole N . The pitch pole N is always below the height of the center of gravity so that an expected vehicle pitching motion towards the front can always be effected when braking.
Characteristics of steering kinematics Steering wheel angle and Steering wheel angle and steering wheel steering wheel torque torque The steering wheel angle dH is the turning angle of the steering wheel measured from the straight ahead position. The angle is positive for a left hand curve.
Steering axis spread is positive when the kingpin axis is inclined to the vehicle center. Kingpin angles are generally positive.
UAF0122 1E ac uy ux at b 1 Chassis systems 1119 Deflection force lever arm Deflection force lever arm The shortest connection between the wheel center and the kingpin axis is called the deflection force lever arm rst. The deflection force lever arm is positive when the wheel center is further from the vehicle center plane than the kingpin axis.
The axes are arranged in such a way that the kingpin offset at wheel center and the deflection force lever arm are as small as possible. This arrangement prevents deflection forces from being generated in the steering.
Scrub radius Scrub radius The distance between the wheel contact point and the point where the kingpin axis intersects the road surface is called the scrub radius rl . The scrub radius is positive when the wheel contact point is further from the center plane than the kingpin axis. When the scrub radius is positive, the wheel moves towards toeout under braking forces. This behavior is particularly advantageous during the "braking in a curve" maneuver. When the scrub radius is negative, the wheel moves towards toe in under braking forces. During the "u split braking" maneuver with different coefficients of friction on the left and right sides of the vehicle this axle behavior creates the precondition for more stable vehicle handling. On account of these different effects the scrub radius is configured to be as small as possible.
Caster angle, Caster angle, caster offset in wheel caster offset in wheel  center and  center and caster offset caster offset When the wheel and the kingpin axis are projected onto the vehicle center plane, the kingpin axis is inclined by the caster angle t. It is positive when the top end of the kingpin axis is inclined towards the rear . In this projection the kingpin axis generally does not pass through the wheel center; instead, it is offset by the caster offset in wheel center nv to the rear.
Rack travel Rack travel The most widely used type of steering  today is rack and pinion steering. Here the steering wheel angle is converted via a pinion into a translational motion of the rack . The rack is connected at both ends to the frontaxle tie rods and thereby enables the toe angle to be adjusted on both wheels. The
Because linear velocity during forward driving is by definition positive, the sign preceding the lateral velocity in this case also determines the sign preceding the float angle.
Ackermann angle Ackermann angle The Ackermann angle corresponds to the axle steering angle . In the event of very low lateral acceleration ay, i.e., if virtually no lateral force is built up, the vehicle moves along the Ackermann angle. Turning circle Turning circle The turning circle is described when cornering at full steering lock by the farthest protruding vehicle parts. The radius of the circle formed is the turning circle.
The turning circle is dependent on the wheelbase and the maximum steering lock, i.e., on the maximum toe angle on the front axle.
Basic terms for tires The most important external forces and moments which act on a vehicle occur during the transmission of force between tire and road surface. Added to this are the wind forces which act on the vehicle special situations.
Footprint Footprint Force is transmitted between tire and road surface by friction in the contact area, also known as the footprint. The two most important types of friction are adhesive friction .
Forces can be generated in the road plane by friction. Lateral force FS is the force perpendicular to the wheel center plane; longitudinal force FU runs in the direction of the wheel center plane .
Slip angle Slip angle When lateral and longitudinal forces occur simultaneously, the forces may be mutually influenced. The situation where lateral and longitudinal forces occur but not combined is considered in the following. The gener 
load as a function of slip angle 5deg 0deg 10deg 15deg Slip angle a Side force FS UFB0134E Chassis systems 1121 ated lateral force FS is dependent on the wheel load and the slip angle a. A dependence of lateral force FS on speed can generally be ignored. The wheel load is the force with which the wheel center is pressed towards the road surface plane. The slip angle a is the angle between the direction of motion of the wheel contact point and the wheel center plane .
If the tire aligning torque is positive, it helps to make the slip angle smaller in terms of amount. This behavior helps to make the turned wheels return to the straight ahead position when the steering wheel is released.
If the drive slip is increased at constant wheel load, the tractive force . The same applies to brake slip. Here the maximum braking force is created at approx. 10 %.
Measured variables In the interests of vehicle development it is sensible to use a special measurement to enable vehicle handling to be measured with greater accuracy. In the dynamics of lateral motion the translational accelerations and the attitude angles are often measured by gyro stabilized platforms. The absolute positions are recorded with GPS measuring systems. In the dynamics of vertical motion the translational accelerations are measured in each of the three directions in space at different points of the body. From these the most important body accelerations can be determined, i.e., those for lift, pitch and roll.
The slip angle a is measured, along similar lines to the float angle, with two proxi mitytype speed sensors. The wheel speed and the longitudinal velocity are measured for slip l. The dynamic rolling radius rdyn is determined on test benches.
The tire aligning force MR, the lateral force FS, and the longitudinal force FU can be recorded in mobile operation by multi component measuring wheels. Because this is very costly, tire forces and tire moments are measured on stationary test benches or determined using special vehicles directly on the road. Up to now, precise measurement of tire forces and tire moments has been accompanied by many systematic failures.
Steering wheel angle and steering wheel torque are measured using special measuring steering wheels. If the measuring accuracy is sufficient, the steering wheel angle sensor fitted as standard in many vehicles can also be used.
Special measuring devices can be used in both mobile and stationary applications to measure toe and camber angles. These angles are typically measured on special test benches.
The variables for the position of the kingpin axis are generally not measured directly. The axle pivot points are often recorded by means of geometric measurements and the following variables are calculated from them: caster angle, caster offset in wheel center, caster offset, kingpin angle, kingpin offset at wheel center, deflection force lever arm, and scrub radius.
The roll pole can be determined by measuring the track change during the reciprocal compression and rebound of an axle. The roll axis is obtained from the roll poles of the front and rear axles.
The pitch pole and startingand braking torque compensation are usually not measured directly, but rather determined from the measured kinematic points of the axle. The same applies to the longitudinal inclination at wheel center, and the anti lift/ anti squat and anti dive/anti rise angles.
Basic principles: The suspension system of a vehicle has a decisive influence on the vibration characteristics and therefore on both comfort and driving safety. Depending on the vehicle category and use case, different solutions have prevailed in the meantime. An overview of the different suspension design elements is shown in Figure 1, using a quarter vehicle as an example.
As a general principle, suspension design elements include all parts of the wheel suspension of a motor vehicle that deliver return forces in the case of elastic deformation. The media that perform the suspension work on the different suspension systems are either steel .
Tires As the connecting element between the road surface and vehicle, the tire is the first suspension design element in the transfer chain from excitation to the occupants that has a decisive influence on both the comfort . It has both suspension and Suspension damping properties, whereby these are not sufficient to eliminate the need for other vibration absorbing elements in modern vehicles. An exception here is mobile machinery, where changed vertical dynamics requirements mean that in almost all cases the suspension and damping are achieved by means of the tires.
Elastomer mounts Elastomer mounts are rubber elements with different functions and properties that interconnect individual components of a chassis system or secure them to the body. The rubber mounts are used to provide insulation against vibrations and thus  enhance comfort, particularly in the case of higher frequency excitation . At the same time the driving dynamics can be decisively influenced by the elastokinematics.
In contrast to series production vehicles, uniball joints are deployed in motor racing; this improves driving dynamics to the detriment of comfort.
In order to reconcile the conflicting objectives of soft mounts for high comfort and rigid mounts for sporty driving dynamics, in the meantime increasing use is made of adaptive or active suspension mounts that are able to adapt their properties to each driving situation.
within the wheel suspension ,  2 Body spring, 3 Tire,  4 Rubber mounts, 5 Stabilizer.
integrate Maintenance requirement for rubber membrane due  to diffusion tendency Rubber springs Rubber spring * Natural frequency is influenced by increased load due to nonlinear spring stiffness * Vulcanized rubber shear spring between metal parts * Used and assembly mountings , suspension arm mountings, additional springs, etc.
tionality, a major advantage of this type of spring is its possible use as a suspension linkage engineering design element to connect the body and axle, because, with the appropriate design, it can absorb lateral or longitudinal forces. Multilayer leaf springs also have damping characteristics which, however, can lead to poor response and acoustic influences. The damping forces that can be achieved are not sufficient to completely eliminate the need for conventional shock absorbers.
The influences on comfort and their weight mean that leaf springs in the meantime no longer meet market requirements for personal transportation and they are therefore only used now in a few passenger cars . It is still usual to use this type of spring in the commercial vehicle sector on account of the low costs and high reliability.
Helical springs The great leeway for configuration with  simultaneously low costs means that  helical springs are the most frequently  deployed type of body springs in the field of passenger cars. On this type of spring, the return forces are generated by the elastic torsion of individual coils during the change in length.
As helical springs are mainly able to absorb forces in the direction of the longitudinal axis of the spring, when they are used as body springs the other force components must be braced by the suspension linkage.
A geometric configuration of the springs that is in line with requirements  means that not only different design envelopes but also different spring characteristics can be achieved. This can be used in turn to influence the load dependent body natural frequency and thus the ride comfort.
Torsion bar springs This type of spring is encountered mainly in passenger cars and light utility vans. They are bars made of spring steel that are subjected to torsion. The fixed clamping of one end of the bar and the rotatable mounting of the other end means that the shaft is elastically torsioned when subjected to a load in the form of torque applied in the direction of its axis. In the motor vehicle, the elastic twisting of the torsion bar is achieved with the help of a crank secured to the rotatable end of the rod . As a rule, the crank arms are suspension arms of the axle or wheel suspension. The torsion bar springs are usually arranged in the bearing center of the suspension arms on the body side on the opposite end of which the vertical wheel force FR takes effect as the external load.
a) Changeable coil diameter, b) Changeable wire diameter, c) Changeable coil spacing, d) Mini block spring . a b c d UFF0224 1Y
possibility to integrate a ride height control function that can be implemented by pumping the intermediate medium in or out.
hth Theoretical spring length, mA Body mass, mR Wheel mass, pi Pressure in the gas spring  , pa Ambient  pressure, V  Working  volume of  the gas  spring, A  Area to  which gas  pressure  is applied.
However, the above mentioned theoretical piston cylinder gas spring is only used in vehicles in a modified form, whereby in principle a distinction is made between two types of gas spring, the air spring with bellows and the hydropneumatic spring. The fundamental difference with regard to the vertical dynamics lies in the influence of the load on driving smoothness and in the different effects on the spring stiffness in the level balancing of both systems. Whereas in the case of the hydropneumatic type level balancing is achieved by pumping in fluid or oil into the spring, thus restoring the original suspension volume. The change in spring stiffness of the hydropneumatic spring type that this causes leads to an increase in the body natural frequency with increasing load. In contrast to this, the air spring with bellows has due to the stiffness change a virtually constant body natural frequency in the entire load range.
To conclude, Figure 6 shows the influence of different suspension systems on the natural frequency, and thus also indirectly on the comfort with rising loads. The reason for the influence of the body natural frequency on comfort lies in the different resonance ranges of different organs in the human body and the consequence that an excitation of human body parts with their natural frequency impairs well being. This is why a body natural frequency, below the resonant frequencies of the human body, that is as independent as possible of the load is to be ensured.
However, Figure 6 also clearly indicates that an approximately constant natural frequency with rising load is only present in the case of air springs. With steel springs, the natural frequency drops due to the constant spring stiffness.
Springs with bellows: Springs with bellows Gas springs with bellows with pneumatic ride height control are suspension systems with constant gas volume , a less progressive and flatter tending characteristic curve can be achieved.
Hydropneumatic springs Hydropneumatic springs In accordance with the considerations above, hydropneumatic springs , whereby the power flux is routed not only through a gas but additionally through a fluid or oil. Here, the fluid and gas are separated by an impermeable rubber membrane. It is only when the fluid or oil is placed in between that a wear resistant and low friction seal is achieved between the piston and cylinder.
Another advantage of this system lies in the possibility to integrate hydraulic damping in the suspension design element. A disadvantage, on the other hand, is the dependency of the natural frequency on the load .
1 Suspension ball, 2 Membrane,  3 Connection to ride height controller, 4 Piston, 5 Screw cap,  6 Suspension cylinder, 7 Cup seal, 8 Shock absorber valve, 9 Rebound stage, 10 Bypass, 11 Compression stage.
of the body, i.e., spring compression of the wheels of one axle in opposite directions, the stabilizer is torsioned and delivers an aligning torque around the roll axis. In the case of in phase vertical motions of one axle, on the other hand, this has no effect. If the proportions of the rolling moment braced by the stabilizers on the front and rear axles have a different ratio to the proportions braced by the body springs, not only is the roll angle reduced but the breakdown of the differences in wheel load of an axle on cornering and thus the self steering effect are also influenced.
On a vehicle with a corresponding stabilizer configuration, this can shift the driving characteristics towards understeer  when the vehicle is driven straight ahead but it also increases the driving dynamics on cornering by minimizing the inclination of the body. Here, the stabilizers do not influence the vertical vibration characteristics of the vehicle.
Compensating springs Compensating springs have the opposite effect to that of the stabilizer . The stiffness of the body springs and this braced proportion of the rolling moment on the axle under examination could then be reduced accordingly. Compensating springs are no longer in modern passenger car wheel suspensions.
Suspension systems: Increasing customer requirements with regard to passenger cars and the strongly fluctuating load states of commercial vehicles mean that exclusive deployment of conventional steel springs is often insufficient. In such cases, either partially loaded or fully loaded suspension systems are used.
The integration of the additional functions of partially loaded or fully loaded systems enables increases in both comfort and driving dynamics .
Partially loaded systems These systems are characterized by the fact that the forces to be braced by the suspension system are divided between steel and air springs according to a specified ratio.
In the case of soft body springs , ride height control systems offer different additional functions.
In the passenger car, for example, a speed dependent ride height control of the body in order to save fuel is possible. The adjustable ride height can also be used on poor quality road surfaces to enhance the vehicle's capability to handle rough terrain.
In the case of commercial vehicles, on the other hand, ride height control enables variable adaptation of the loading area to different loading ramps. Other functions can also be implemented by networking with other systems. These include, for example, an automatic ride height increase if the lifting axle is raised, lowering on exceeding the maximum axle load, or brief raising of the lifting axle to increase the wheel load on the driven axle.
1 Filter, 2 Compressor, 3 Drier, 4 2/2 directional control valve, 5 Bellows, 6 Non return valve, 7 Pressure container, 8 Pressure switch, 9 3/2 directional control valve. 3 1 2 9 4 5 4 5 4 5 6 7 4 5 4 5 4 5 2 1 8 9 a b UFF0232Y
Fully loaded suspension systems: In the case of fully loaded systems, as opposed to partially loaded solutions, the task of suspension is assumed solely by the gas springs and the helical springs are completely eliminated. Depending on the available hardware and control strategy, the ride height control can be on selected axles or on all axles. Embedding the control system architecture in the global vehicle control architecture ensures that a negative mutual influence of the axles is excluded, thus preventing, for example, the vehicle body from slanting.
As a general principle, the ride height control for fully loaded systems can be designed in the form of an open or closed system. In the case of the open system, a compressor draws air from the atmosphere and provides it in compressed form to the air springs if required. The increase in pressure raises the vehicle body. To lower the ride height, air is expelled into the environment, thus lowering the pressure in the springs again. Although this system involves relatively low overhead in construction and has a simple control system, it has the decisive disadvantage that high compressor output has to be provided for the short periods of control operation, which is accompanied by corresponding increased consumption. Moreover, an air drier is required and an acoustic load can be expected when air is drawn in and expelled.
The closed system draws air from a pressure accumulator of the suspension system and feeds this directly to the air springs. When the ride height is lowered, the compressed air is returned to the pressure tank. Although the compressor output requirements for this system are lower and the air drier can be eliminated because the working medium is already dry, other components  are required, fundamentally increasing the overhead in construction compared to an open system.
The system architectures of the open and closed ride height control systems are compared in Figure 11. This clearly illustrates the greater complexity of the closed system.
Active spring systems Compared to passive systems, active vehicle chassis systems enable optimal adaptation of spring and damper forces to all driving states and road irregularities. With the aid of external sources of energy, forces are generated that stabilize both the axles and the vehicle body. In the meantime, a number of different system architectures have been developed. These differ above all with regard to the overhead involved , the energy requirement, and the quality of control operations. A few of these systems are presented briefly below.
Systems with Systems with hydraulic cylinders hydraulic cylinders With this version, the body motion and body position are regulated with quickly adjustable hydraulic cylinders are used as input variables for the control operation.
The control system achieves virtually constant wheel loads while maintaining a constant mean ride height. The static wheel load in this case is carried by steel springs or hydropneumatic springs.
hydraulic cylinder 1 Vehicle body, 2 Wheel load sensor, 3 Travel sensor, 4 Accumulator,  5 Pump circuit, 6 Servo valve,  7 Positioning cylinder, 8 Acceleration sensor. 1 2 5 3 7 8 4 6 6 UFF0233Y
Systems with : Systems with hydropneumatic hydropneumatic  suspension system suspension system To stabilize the vehicle, a hydropneumatic suspension system uses specific oil regulation. This is done by pumping hydraulic oil into the suspension struts or draining it off the suspension struts . In the case of higher frequency proportions, a gas volume takes effect in the proximity of the suspension strut. Here, the shock absorber is essentially geared to the wheel movements.
Version with Version with spring mounted point spring mounted point  adjustment  adjustment In this system, the vehicle body is held horizontally in the low frequency range in that a conventional helical spring is designed as variable at its mounting point . The base is raised for spring compression and lowered for spring rebound. Control operations are continuous by means of a fluid pump and proportioning valves. The helical spring, however, must be longer compared to its original design. In this type of system, the shock absorbers can be fitted with constant adjustment parameters and, above all, they can be matched to the wheel dampers.
adjustment 1 Vehicle body, 2 Travel sensor,  3 Accumulator, 4 Pump circuit , 9 Spring mounted point adjuster.
1 Vehicle body, 2 Travel sensor, 3 Accumulator, 4 Pump circuit, 5 Acceleration sensor, 6 Throttle, 7 Proportioning valve, 8 Shock absorber piston fitted with valves. 1 4 7 6 2 8 5 3 8 UFF0234 1Y UFF0235 1Y
of rolling and pitching vibrations. In the : solution that is currently implemented, the static wheel loads are absorbed via torsion springs at the wheels to limit the electrical energy requirement. A passive shock absorber is also used.
The advantages of the electromagnetic solution lie above all in the high adjustment speed. Despite the low outer dimensions, the electric motors have sufficient power output to ensure driving safety in all driving situations. In comparison with conventional systems, the disadvantages lie in the greater weight and in the increased costs, as an additional, non electronic damping system is required for safety reasons. As a general principle, however, the electromagnetic motor can also be operated as a generator, which means that damping can also be performed electrically and thereby energy can be recuperated. This enables a lowering of the power requirement of the overall system, which is specified for standard road surfaces as less than 1 kW. _________________________________ References References B. Heissing, M. Ersoy : Fahrwerk handbuch. 1st Edition, Vieweg Verlag, 2007.
Shock absorbers: The masses of the vehicle body and wheels connected by the body springs form a system that can vibrate and is excited by irregularities on the roadway and the dynamic movements of the vehicle. Shock absorbers are required to dampen the vibrating system. Nowadays, it is almost exclusively hydraulic telescopic shock absorbers that are used in motor vehicles as body shock absorbers; these convert the kinetic energy of the body and wheel vibrations into heat. The shock absorbers are configured taking account of the partially conflicting requirements for comfort .
In the other working chamber , the effective area corresponds to the piston surface AK which results from the diameter D of the shock absorber piston.
a) Single tube shock absorber, b) Twin tube shock absorber. 1 Piston rod, 2 Working cylinder, 3 Shock absorber piston, 4 Piston seal,  5 Working chamber 1, 6 Working chamber 2, 7 Piston valve .
D  Inner diameter of working cylinder and diameter of shock absorber piston,  d  Diameter of piston rod.
SFF0212 3Y a d D 1 5 6 3 10 8 2 4 7 9 4 b d D 1 5 8 11 7 15 12 3 2 4 6 14 13
When there is a movement of the shock: absorber piston . The oil volume flows in each case must pass the corresponding valves.
The volume flow Q through a valve is linked via the throughflow characteristics of each valve to the prevailing pressure difference D p. The throughflow characteristics of a valve result from the joint effect of the throttle geometry inside the shock absorber. Cavitation leads to acoustic problems and also to damage ultimately to failure of a shock absorber. The cavitation tendency can also be effectively counteracted by pressurizing the shock absorber oil.
 can be absorbed without creating a vacuum at the piston road seal. The working volume flow Q 1 flows through each of the piston valves. On moving in, it flows though the compression stage valve and on moving out through the rebound stage valve.
The high gas pressure means that the tendency for cavitation to occur is low in the case of the single tube shock absorber. The heat that is generated can be released into the environment directly via the outer surface of the working cylinder. The advantages of lean design, the low weight and discretionary installation position of the single tube shock absorber are offset by the great length, increased friction due to the high internal pressure , and high requirements with regard to sealing the piston rod and gas volume. Furthermore, the single tube shock absorber is, on account of its more filigree design, not suitable for absorbing considerable lateral forces and bending moments.
Twin tube shock absorbers Twin tube shock absorbers Twin tube shock absorbers have a compensating chamber resulting from the arrangement of an outer tube around the working cylinder . The com 
pensating chamber balances out the re : tracting or extending piston rod volume. To achieve this, it is connected via bottom valves to the lower working chamber of the shock absorber. The compensating chamber is partly filled with shock absorber oil and partly with a gas .
The compensating chamber means that twin tube shock absorbers have poorer heat dissipation in comparison with single tube shock absorbers. Furthermore, the installation position of twin tube shock absorbers is restricted, as it must be ensured at all times that there is compensating fluid at the bottom valves. Advantages compared to the single tube shock absorber are the lower shock absorber length and the softer responsiveness due to the seals being subject to less load with correspondingly lower requirements. Furthermore, thanks to its twin walled structure, the twin tube shock absorber, with a suitably more solid piston rod and outer tube design, can absorb lateral forces and bending moments, meaning that it can be used as a wheel control element .
In the area of passenger cars, the twintube shock absorber has prevailed as the standard shock absorber also due to its lower costs.
characteristic curves 1 Upper limit of adjustment range , 3 Adjustment range of shock absorber, 4 Characteristic curve of a passive shock absorber.
in the instrument panel. Adjustability di : rectly at the shock absorber itself is encountered primarily in motor sport and in sporty retrofit shock absorbers.
Rheological shock absorber systems Rheological shock absorber systems The adjustability of the damping characteristics in the case of rheological shock absorber systems is based on the change in the flow properties of the working medium that is used. Magneto rheological fluids that change their viscosity under the influence of a magnetic field are used here instead of the usual mineral oils. Electro rheological fluids have similar properties under the effect of an electric field, but the effect is utilizable to a much lesser extent, which is why primarily magneto rheological methods have prevailed. The viscosity of the working medium has a direct influence on the flow resistance through the valves. If, for example, creating a magnetic field increases the viscosity of a magneto rheological working medium, the flow resistance through the valves increases.
Rheological shock absorber systems not only provide the possibility for infinitely variable adjustment of the damping characteristics but also the implementation of very short adjustment times .
a) Suspension/shock absorber  system, b) Damping, normal driving style, c) Control piston at end stop blocks the bypass channel, resulting in stronger damping effect with a dynamic driving style and in curves .
1 Piston rod, 2 Restriction bore, 3 Working chamber, 4 Control piston, 5 Piston, 6  oil volume flow through piston valve, 7 Bypass channel.
oil flows in part through this bypass and displaces the control piston, increasing the flow cross section and thus reducing the damping forces. When the control piston reaches its structurally predetermined end stop, the oil now flows only through the piston valve and the damping forces increase. The freely moving section of the control piston determines the amplitude up to which the damping forces are reduced, usually a few millimeters. The result of this is that  smaller road irregularities are damped much less than for example than pitching or rolling of the vehicle, which provides for good comfort and at the same time good driving dynamics.
Stroke dependent shock absorbers Stroke dependent shock absorbers In stroke dependent shock absorbers the operating principle of the partially enlarged flow cross section is effected by bypass grooves over a predetermined length in the shock absorber tube . Because of the fixed position of the grooves this system is dependent on the stroke range and the piston position in the shock absorber and less so on the oscillation amplitude.
Frequency selective shock absorbers Frequency selective shock absorbers In the case of frequency selective shock absorbers the cross section is altered by spring loaded, oscillatory valves which according to the tunning at predetermined frequencies  reduce the flow cross section and consequently increase the damping forces. Less damping occurs outside the defined frequency range.
absorber a) Two stage damping: damping dependent  on load/stroke, b) Two stage damping: damping dependent  on dynamic load  Hydraulic end position damping for  rebound/compression stage.
created. Varying the bore diameter in the : shock absorber piston influences primarily the progression . Modern body shock absorbers have mainly degressive characteristics. This achieves a high damping effect at low excitation speeds as well as a limitation of the maximum damping forces.
Damping characteristic curves are usually determined with the help of mechanical or servo hydraulic testing units. A sinusoidal path excitation of constant amplitude and variable frequency or constant frequency and variable amplitude results in various maximum speeds of the inward or outward movement. The recorded path and force signals can be applied in a force path diagram .
the vehicle body during the compression phase in the rebound phase. In the event of an asymmetrical distribution of the required total shock absorber work in favor of a high rebound stage there is the danger of the shock absorber contracting with soft springs.
a) Work diagram Maximum shock absorber speed at f2,  A Constant excitation amplitude.
sorbers, thus, for example, influencing : and optimizing ride comfort or driving safety. Such systems are often also called semi active because no active spring adjustment actually occurs, the wheel movement however can be well defined via the adjustable shock absorber within limits.
Control strategies Threshold value strategy Threshold value strategy Threshold value controllers compare one or a number of relevant driving state variables with the corresponding limit values and initiate defined measures if these values are exceeded or not reached. The damping forces are usually influenced axle by axle simultaneously in the rebound and compression directions. The main focus of threshold value controllers is on increasing comfort while simultaneously maintaining driving safety.
of the skyhook approach kS Damping constant of skyhook  shock absorber, mA Body mass, zA Vertical body motion, cA Spring stiffness of body spring, kA Damping constant of body shock  absorber, mR Wheel mass , zR Vertical wheel movement, cR Vertical tire spring stiffness, kR Damping constant of tire, h  Vertical road excitation.
Depending on the amount and direction of the vehicle body speed and the shock absorber movement , the control strategy for the skyhook approach shown in Figure 7 is pursued for comfortable damping of the vehicle body. However, specific damping of rolling, pitching, and wheel vibrations is not taken into account by this approach. These movements are also highly relevant with regard to ride comfort and driving safety, which means that the skyhook controller is generally overridden by other controllers.
of the groundhook approach mA Body mass, zA Vertical body motion, cA Spring stiffness of body spring, kA Damping constant of body shock  absorber, mR Wheel mass , zR Vertical wheel movement, cR Vertical tire spring stiffness, kR Damping constant of tire, h  Vertical road excitation, kG Damping constant of groundhook  shock absorber.
Low damping Shock absorber movement Strong damping Low damping Low damping Strong damping Low damping Low damping Low damping Vehicle body speed zA .
R h  ____ z R z A  where: z A Vertical body speed, z R Vertical wheel speed, h Vertical excitation speed, kG Damping constant of the groundhook shock absorber.
Also for the groundhook controller, a case distinction is made depending on the directions of movement of the wheel and vehicle body. This case distinction takes place on the basis of the term: .
Huang's algorithm Huang's algorithm The aim of Huang's algorithm is shock absorber control in favor of as low an effective body acceleration as possible as a comfort criterion . With high body acceleration and rectified damping force, damping is set as high as possible. If damping force and body acceleration are opposed, damping is set as low as possible.
z A <= 0 soft characteristic.
Vibration absorbers To specifically influence the vibration properties of the vibration system consisting of the wheel and vehicle body mass, vibration absorbers are deployed in some cases in the area of the chassis.
movement as a function of the excitation angular frequency with and without  vibration absorbers 1 Progression without vibration absorber, 2 Progression with vibration absorber. 1 2 zR Vibration amplitude Excitation angular frequency oR SFF0214 1E
On excitation of the vibration system, the : vibrations and oscillations of the main system are taken over by the appropriately coordinated vibration absorber, i.e., the main system only vibrates very slightly whereas the absorber absorbs a large portion of the energy. Figure 9 shows an example of the progression of the vibration amplitude of a wheel movement with and without vibration absorbers. With the deployment of a vibration absorber geared to the frequency range of the natural wheel frequency, a significant drop in the vibration amplitude can be observed in the corresponding frequency range. However, vibration absorbers have the disadvantage of a high additional mass.
a)  Vibration absorber in chassis Substitute system. kA Damping constant of body shock absorber, cA Spring stiffness of body spring, kT Damping constant of vibration absorber, cT Spring stiffness of absorber spring, mT Absorber mass, mA Body mass, zA Vertical body motion, mR Wheel mass, zR Vertical wheel movement, cR Vertical tire spring stiffness, kR Damping constant of tire, h Vertical road excitation. mT kT cT kA cA mA kA cA mR kR cT kT cR mT zA zR h a b SFF0204 2Y
For the definitions of the individual wheel suspension and vehicle parameters, refer to the chapter "Chassis systems", section "Characteristics": Kinematics and elastokinematics During operation of the vehicle, the geometry and kinematics of a wheel suspension lead to changes in the characteristic parameters of the wheel suspension or with steerable wheel suspensions as a result of a steering movement. Figure 1 shows examples of the camberand toe angle changes of a wheel suspension due to kinematics during compression by the compression path Dz in comparison with the design position. As a rule, the kinematic wheel position changes are shown with the help of diagrams of the compression and rebound path of the wheel. The so called "wheel paths" for the camber and toe angle changes of the wheel suspension shown in Figures 1a and 1b are shown in Figure 1c.
Due to the fact that the kinematic changes to the wheel suspension parameters and wheel position parameters have a great influence on the driving characteristics of a vehicle, correct configuration and coordination of the steering and wheel lift kinematics are of great significance.
Alongside the changes to the wheel position parameters due to kinematics during compression or rebound movements, the forces and torques affecting the wheel suspension in conjunction with the elasticity of the suspension lead to further wheel position changes. The elasticity of a wheel suspension results from the deformability of the individual wheel suspension components (for example Wheel suspensions
links) and the bearings used when forces : and torques are applied. For reasons related to driving comfort and acoustics, the mounts used in modern wheel suspensions are usually elastic mounts . Figure 2 shows an example of a wheel suspension with two rubber mounts fitted on the vehicle body side; their elasticity when longitudinal force occurs at the wheel contact point leads to an elastokinematic change in the toe angle of the wheel.
Alongside the kinematic wheel position changes, the elastokinematic effects also influence the driving characteristics of a vehicle. When coordinating the kinematics and elastokinematics of a wheel suspension, this is why it is usually the aim that the kinematic and elastokinematic effects supplement one another when influenced by forces and springs.
For example, elastokinematic steering is used on a number of modern rear axle suspensions to reduce load change reactions . It is possible to influence the elastokinematic properties of a wheel suspension by, for example, coordinating the individual mount elasticities or adjusting individual mounting points.
changes in the case of compression movement a) Kinematic camber change  Wheel path.
change due to effect of longitudinal force Fx Longitudinal force .
Basic categories of wheel : suspensions There are a large number of different wheel suspensions. They are classified primarily according to the type of suspension concept. An initial distinction is made between rigid axles .
Rigid axles In the case of a rigid axle, the wheels of an axle are firmly interconnected by a rigid axle body, which leads to mutual influences on the wheels. Rigid axles are used as both driven and non driven rear axles on heavy vehicles .
Guidance of a rigid axle in relation to the vehicle body can be implemented in different ways. On vehicles with leaf springs, guidance is usually via the spring leaves . Where links and coupling shafts are used, statically undefined mounts are selected to make linking at the vehicle body easier and to reduce the required space for detailed explanations of the individual axle variants. The major advantages of rigid axles are the simple and sturdy design, low costs, a high roll center, high maximum wheel lift, and high ground clearance.
However, rigid axles also have a number of disadvantages that are inherent in the design: the mutual wheel influence, high unsprung mass, high installation space requirement, as well as limited possibilities to coordinate the kinematic and elastokinematic factors.
1 Rigid axle, 2 Leaf spring,  3 Trailing link, 4 Coupling shaft link,  5 Coupling shaft, 6 Watt linkage, 7 Panhard rod.
that is used enables relative movements : between the wheels. The coupling profile forms a cross connection between two trailing links to which it is firmly connected. Longitudinal forces are absorbed via the trailing links. The bracing of lateral forces is supported by the stiffening effect of the coupling profile. In order to guarantee a relative movement between the two wheels of the axle, the coupling profile has to be designed as weak. Depending on the arrangement of the coupling profile, distinctions are made between torsional link axles, twist beam axles and semi independent axles .
Due to their simple and low cost design, semi rigid axles are widely used as rear axles on vehicles with front wheel drive. The advantages of this axle concept include the low installation space requirement, the low unsprung masses, easy assembly and removal, the stabilizing effect of the coupling profile, the low track width and toe angle changes, as well as the good anti dive properties.
axle is not at the height of the : link pivot points rather is offset towards the rear. This improves above all lateral force bracing in comparison with the twistbeam axle.
Independent wheel suspensions Alongside semi rigid axles as rear axles on vehicles with front wheel drive most modern vehicles nowadays have independent wheel suspensions where each wheel is individually connected to the vehicle body according to the desired degrees of freedom of movement. A wheel is connected here with the help of a wheel carrier and a corresponding number of links.
The design of the wheel during compression and rebound movement is also frequently used for the classification of independent wheel suspensions .
The proportion of independent wheel suspensions in modern vehicles is rising steadily. Compared to rigid and semi rigid axles, independent wheel suspensions offer a number of advantages. For example, there is no mutual wheel influence, the kinematic and elastokinematic optimization potential is high, and the space requirement and unsprung mass are low in some cases.
However, independent wheel suspensions also have some disadvantages. In some cases, they lead to a complex design, the costs are high, the maximum wheel lift is low, and the configuration and coordination process is more complex in some cases.
There are large numbers of different designs of independent wheel suspensions. The basic principles of selected designs are to be explained briefly in the following section and their structures shown in diagrams. For detailed explanations of the individual designs and of other independent wheel suspensions and specific design examples, refer to .
Trailing link independent  Trailing link independent  wheel suspension wheel suspension On a trailing link independent wheel suspension, a wheel is connected to the vehicle body by means of a single link arranged in longitudinal direction .
Double wishbone independent  Double wishbone independent  wheel suspension wheel suspension A double wishbone independent suspension is when a wheel is connected to the
vehicle body via two A arm links. One link : is arranged below the wheel center and the other is arranged above it , which enables the suspension to brace all of the forces and torques that occur at the wheel. As a rule, the high articulation forces mean that the transverse links are not directly connected to the vehicle body structure but rather are secured to a "chassis subframe" that interconnects both wheel suspensions and thus relieves the load of inner forces on the vehicle body.
With adaptation of the mounts and design of the links, double wishbone independent suspensions provide very high kinematic optimization potential . The disadvantages of double wishbone independent suspensions are the higher costs as well as the greater installation space requirement.
strut independent wheel suspension a) Double wishbone independent wheel suspension, b) Spring strut independent wheel suspension, c) Damper strut independent wheel suspension. 1 Wheel carrier, 2 Upper A arm link, 3 Lower A arm link,  4 Spring damper strut,  5 Tie rod .
a b 2 2 1 1 SFF0209 2Y UFF0210 4Y a 1 3 3 5 5 1 2 2 b 1 1 3 3 5 5 4 4 5 5 c 3 1 1 3 6 6 4 4
Spring strut independent : Spring strut independent  wheel suspension wheel suspension The kinematics of a spring strut wheel suspension correspond to those of a double wishbone independent suspension in which the upper transverse link is replaced by a sliding guide where the housing is rigidly connected to the wheel carrier. With this design, the shock absorber rod also assumes wheel guidance tasks.
The lower link plane of a spring strut suspension is usually formed by two twopoint links or an A arm link. In the case of a suspension using the McPherson principle, originally the lower A arm link was formed from a transverse link and a stabilizer. Nowadays, however, other spring strut suspensions are also referred to as McPherson axles.
Advantages of the spring strut wheel suspension are above all the low construction overhead and low amount of space required at the height of the wheel axes which can be used in particular in the case of passenger cars with front wheel drive with laterally installed engine transmission units. Other advantages are the cost saving and weight saving design, simple installation and assembly, as well as the high degree of integration. On specifying the kinematics, however, spring strut suspensions offer slightly less leeway for configuration, among others of scrub radius and deflection force lever arm, in comparison with double wishbone independent suspensions.
Damper strut independent  Damper strut independent  wheel suspension wheel suspension Kinematically similar to the McPherson axle, here too the supension linkage function is assumed . Breaking down three point links and the use of independent two point links usually result in greater leeway for configuration of the kinematic and elastokinematic properties of the axle. On the one hand, this increases the optimization of the axle with regard to comfort and driving safety requirements. On the other hand, the somewhat complex design increases the overhead involved in the configuration and coordination processes for the wheel suspension.
Trapezoidal link independent  Trapezoidal link independent  wheel suspension wheel suspension Trapezoidal link wheel suspensions are a special form of the multilink independent wheel suspension that is mainly used as rear axles. The lower plane is formed by a trapezoidal link that has two connection points on the wheel side and an axis of rotation on the vehicle body side. This means the lower link sets a total of three degrees of freedom of the wheel. Another two degrees of freedom are eliminated by two two point links arranged accordingly so that only the desired compression degree of freedom of the wheel remains.
link) is connected to the vehicle body in such a way that it can be rotated and is firmly connected to the wheel carrier. As a rule, it has elastic properties in order to enable kinematic track and camber changes. The lateral forces are braced via three two point transverse links which are usually arranged in two planes . The arrangement and orientation of the transverse links determines the kinematic properties of the wheel suspension.
Five link independent wheel suspension: Five link independent wheel suspension A wheel suspension with completely detached links requires five individual twopoint links to reduce the movement of a wheel to the desired vertical degree of freedom . Five link rear axles are generally referred to as multilink suspensions, whereby on the front axle this is referred to as a four link axle plus tie rod L. Eckstein: Vertikalund Querdynamik von Kraftfahrzeugen. ika/fka 2010.
independent wheel suspensions a) Multilink independent wheel suspension, b) Trapezoidal link independent wheel suspension, c) Control blade independent wheel suspension, d) Five link independent wheel suspension. 1 Wheel carrier, 2 Two point link, 3 A arm link, 4 Tie rod , 5 Trapezoidal link, 6 Control blade.
c 2 2 2 6 6 1 1 a 3 3 2 2 2 2 4 4 b 2 5 5 2 2 2 d 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 SFF0211 4Y
Function and requirements : All of the vehicle specific or axle specific tasks are performed via the wheel, e. g. transfer of dynamic forces between the vehicle and road surface. These include taking up the vehicle load and the impact forces of the road surface, transferring the rotary motion of the axles to the tires, and taking up and transferring braking and acceleration forces as well as lateral forces when cornering. Wheel size is mainly determined by the space required by the braking system, the axle components, and the size of the tires used.
Structure The wheel is a load bearing, rotating part between the tire and the axle. It usually consists of two main components the rim and the wheel disk. These two components can be made from a single part, and can also be permanently or non permanently attached to each other. A permanent connection of a rim with a wheel disk is called a disk wheel.
In daily usage the terms rim and wheel are often interchanged. The term rim is often used when actually the complete wheel is meant. The "wheel" in general usage often also refers to the tire. However, as a technical term in automotive engineering "wheel" generally means the wheel without the tire.
contains the center hole and the wheelbolt or stud holes. The wheel is secured to the axle through these holes. The center hole is provided with a locating bore by means of which the wheel is radially centered on the axle. This bore determines together with the rim bead seat . The attachment face is, together with the rim flanges, responsible for lateral wheel run out. In the case of an aluminum wheel, the wheel disk can, due to its design, have different shapes such that the term wheel disk is no longer applicable.
1 Rim inner flange, 2 Rim base, 3 Rim outer flange, 4 Ventilation hole, 5 Wheel disk, 6 Pitch circle diameter, 7 Center hole, 8 Dish.
Rim flange Rim flange The rim is limited on the inner and outer sides by a rim flange by, for example, J, K, JK or B. In this way, the geometry of the rim flange and the ratio to the drop center are dimensionally described. This is based on how the wheel is used.
The most common rim flange shape for passenger cars is the J flange shape. The lower B flange can be found on smaller vehicles and in inflatable spare tire systems. K and JK flanges are rarely used any more; they used to be the domain of heavy, comfortable vehicles of the upper price segment.
Rim bead seat Rim bead seat The rim bead seat describes the contact zone of the tire with the rim. It centers the tire radially. In this zone the tire is given the correct position for radial and lateral true running. All the dynamic driving forces are transferred here. In the tubeless tires mainly used today in passenger cars the wheel/tire system is sealed at the rim bead seat.
c) PAX rim  ,  steel wheel version.
, 1 Bolt holes,  2 Rim center, D Rim diameter, ET Rim offset, L Pitch circle diameter, M Flange to flange width, N Center hole diameter, S Tire width.
a) Drop center rim, b) 15deg tapered bead seat rim, c) Wide 15deg tapered bead seat rim, d) 5deg tapered bead seat rim, e) Two part passenger car rim.
1 Hump,  2 Rim base,  3 Flange to flange width, 4 Rim flange,  5 15deg tapered bead seat,  6 5deg tapered bead seat,  7 Sealant, 8 Wheel disk,  9 Bolt.
into a front half and a rear half which are bolted to each other in the drop center through an all round pitch circle and to the wheel disk. A sealing ring or a sealing compound is used to provide the seal. The two part variant traces its origins back to motor sport and offered the advantage of being able to replace one rim half in the event of damage. The tire is mounted in exactly the same way as on the singlepart rim.
15deg tapered bead seat rim  15deg tapered bead seat rim  for commercial vehicles for commercial vehicles The 15deg tapered bead seat rim is made from a single part. The rim base is for tire mounting purposes provided with a drop center to which the 15deg tapered bead seats are connected. The 15deg tapered bead seat rim with drop center is necessary to enable the benefits of the tubeless tire to be exploited on heavy commercial vehicles too.
5deg tapered bead seat rim 5deg tapered bead seat rim The 5deg tapered bead seat rim , also called flat base rim, is made from multiple parts. This is needed to mount the tires. The outer 5deg tapered bead seat, which is non permanently connected to the outer rim flange, can be removed. The outer 5deg tapered bead seat is held on the rim base by an all round sealing ring. The tire is pushed onto the rim base when the 5deg tapered bead seat is removed. The fact that the rim is made from multiple parts means that a tube is required. The two bead seats have a 5deg taper.
These rim systems have advantages when it comes to changing tires. However, they are heavier than 15deg tapered bead seat rims and do not exhibit the good  radial and lateral true running properties of single part rims.
Special trims  Special trims  for special wheel/tire systems for special wheel/tire systems PAX are distinct rim geometries which can only be used with specially developed tires. This design is used primarily on armored vehicles. The complete system is designed to permit continued driving with a punctured tire without the tire coming off the rim. The two systems also prevent the tire from being destroyed by thermal load during driving when punctured. With a conventional rim base the sidewall folds up when the tire is punctured and friction occurs.
In the PAX system  from Michelin an additional support ring is mounted on the rim base; the punctured tire rests on this support ring.
for special wheel/tire systems a) PAX system with reinforced run flat tire, b) PAX system with support ring, c) CT system Conventional wheel tire system.
1 Rim, 2 Run flat  tire with  reinforced sidewall, 3 Tire,  4 Support ring,  5 Valve with tire pressure control.
Special requirements  for commercial vehicle wheels Wheels for commercial vehicles are technologically highly sophisticated. Whereas racing car wheels are geared towards maximum speed, commercial vehicle wheels carry high tonnages at simultaneously compared with excavators for example high speed. In Europe, for example, long distance commercial vehicles travel with a total weight of 40 tons at a speed of 80 km/h. It is essential when establishing the minimum tire size for a commercial vehicle axle always to start out from the permissible axle load and the top speed dictated by the vehicle design. The larger the load to be transported and the rougher the terrain to be negotiated, the more important it is to take into account the sometimes competing rim design requirements. High load capacity is to be achieved by designing an appropriate wheel shape and using optimum materials. High fatigue strength is essential to increasing road safety. Low wheel weight optimizes payload and is required because the wheel, as an unsprung, rotating mass, influences the overall vehicle oscillatory system.
6 1/2  Dimension of rim width in inches, J  Rim flange geometry, x  Single part rim base, 16  Dimension of rim diameter in inches, H2  Rim hump at the inner and outer rim bead seats, ET Rim offset, 30 Dimension of rim offset in mm.
The designation and the associated  dimensions with permitted tolerances have been prescribed as binding and standardized by worldwide recognized standards organizations such as ETRTO  to harmonize rim and tire dimensions.
Materials for wheels: There are basically steel and light alloy wheels. The material must always be specified in connection with the manufacturing technology. The following overview is intended to simplify systematization. Classification of wheels Steel wheel Steel wheel A steel wheel consists of two parts, the rim and the wheel disk. Steel wheels are made from hot rolled sheet steel in a forming process under rolling and bending conditions and joined by welding.
Light alloy wheel Light alloy wheel Light alloy wheels are usually made of aluminum or magnesium alloys. They are produced using a variety of technologies. The aluminum wheel is produced as a cast wheel, forged wheel, sheet metal wheel, or hybrid wheel. The magnesium wheel is only produced as a cast wheel. The advantages of lightweight wheels are improved vibrational behavior, responsive suspension, reduced fuel consumption, and higher payloads. Light alloy wheels are used in commercial vehicle applications in particular in weight sensitive transportation jobs. These jobs include the transportation of tanks and silos, where not exceeding the maximum transportation weight is of primary importance. In these situations the higher cost light alloy wheels usually pay for themselves within the first year of use.
Plastic wheel Plastic wheel Plastic wheels are made in an injectionmolding process from mineral fiber reinforced polyamide and with metal inserts. Materials Sheet steel Sheet steel In all the cheapest variant of passenger car wheels is manufactured from hot rolled and pickled sheet steel strip unrolled from the coil. The very good  mechanical properties of this material provide for thin walled wheel designed which are manufactured in highly automated, high precision forming processes under bending conditions to finishing  dimensions with close tolerances.
The continuous trend towards lightweight construction particularly since the CO2 discussion has accelerated the use of high strength, fine grained structural steel. Its high tensile strength  and very good formability and weldability enable lightweight, and cost effective wheels to be manufactured efficiently.
Further potential for weight savings can be opened up by the use of "tailored blanks" for rim production. Here the sheet thickness of the starting material is adapted to the stresses in the wheel, in the course of which material strips of sheets of different thicknesses are joined by laser welding to create a blank.
Aluminum sheet Aluminum sheet Aluminum sheet as an alternative to sheet steel can be more easily formed and is also albeit thanks to more expensive methods more readily weldable. The manufacturing overhead is greater relative to steel wheels and the material costs are comparatively high, which prevents a wider range of applications. The use of high strength sheet steels has greatly reduced the original weight advantage of aluminum sheet with the result that a cost/benefit analysis comes out in favor of steel wheels.
Light metal alloys Light metal alloys Light metal alloys are based in the main on aluminum alloys and in rare cases on magnesium alloys. In the case of aluminum wheels, a distinction is made between cast and forge alloys depending on the manufacturing method used.
Cast alloys: Aluminum cast wheels are manufactured in low pressure diecasting from aluminum alloys. The cast blank is formed in a steel mold, which is filled with liquid molten mass and cooled under controlled conditions to solidify. Aluminum alloys with a silicon content of between 7 and 11 % are used, depending on whether good castability or high strength is to be achieved. Two alloys have proven successful.
GK AlSi11 is used for small wheels with low wheel loads. The outstanding castability thanks to the high silicon content provides for highly efficient production with low reject rates due to casting defects. This alloy cannot be hardened by heat treatment. The wheels are therefore designed with greater wall thicknesses, which is reflected in slightly higher weights.
GK AlSi7Mg is used for large wheels with a higher wheel load and for weightoptimized wheels. Adding 0.2...0.5 % magnesium to the aluminum alloy increases the strength of the cast wheel as a result of subsequent heat treatment . This advantage is exploited to meet high load requirements during vehicle operation with a minimum of material usage.
To ensure that the high requirements with regard to strength, tightness and ductility placed on these safety related vehicle components are met, only pure primary aluminum is used as the starting material. Contamination of the alloy with iron would cause acicular structures to form, which in turn would weaken the mechanical properties . Contamination with copper would reduce the chemical stability.
Forge alloy Aluminum forged wheels are used in passenger cars when light, weight optimized wheels are required and the target weight cannot be achieved with cast wheels.
The increased hardness of the aluminum wrought alloy caused by the forging process  and a flow forming process to create the rim. As well as being hardened by plastic deformation the material is modified by a heat treatment process.
Magnesium alloys Whereas magnesium alloys have been unable to establish themselves in volume production due to higher production costs in view of special safety precautions  they are used in individual cases for special purpose  vehicles and racing cars.
Plastics Plastics The use of plastic as a material for wheels is still in the developmental stage due in particular to insufficient high temperature strength and difficult wheel mounting and manufacture. In particular the insufficient impact strength and thermal load capability as well as the incalculable long term properties mean that plastic currently  appears to make little sense as a material for a safety component such as the disk wheel in automobile construction.
Manufacturing processes: Steel wheels When the text refers to passenger car and commercial vehicle steel wheels, exclusively sheet steel wheels are what are meant. Other manufacturing processes such as casting and forging are not used for this material to manufacture wheels. Passenger car steel wheels consists of two parts: the wheel disk and the rim. They are welded to each other at the end of the production process. Both the wheel disk and the rim are manufactured in volume production on fully linked, highly automated production lines by means of forming processes under bending conditions. Smaller quantities can be produced more economically on individual presses. Manufacturing the wheel disk Manufacturing the wheel disk To manufacture the wheel disk the material required is unrolled directly from the coil, straightened flat and fed to a large transfer press with a force of pressure of approx. 40,000 kN. The press is equipped with a nineto eleven stage follow on composite tool, in which the sheet blank is automatically routed with each press stroke from station to station.
A square blank with rounded corners is punched in the first machining step. Then in three to four stages the wheel disk and the center hole area are formed by deepdrawing and stamping operations. In the next two or three stations the ventilation holes are punched with wedge driving tools and then stamped on the tool outlet side. The stamping replaces deburring of the pointed cutting edges and reduces the wheel's susceptibility to cracking under load.
Finally, the wheel designations are stamped on the reverse side and the calotteor cone shaped wheel stud attachment faces are formed. In the last stage the wheel disk is calibrated to the finishing dimension for joining with the rim. Manufacturing the rim Manufacturing the rim The rim material is likewise unrolled from the sheet coil, straightened and cut to length. The strips are stacked and forwarded to the automated rim production line. Here the sheet strip is shaped in a bending machine between three cylinder rolls into a ring and joined at the junction point in a butt seam welding machine. The upsetting flash created in the process is then planed away on the inside and outside and the weld seam is smoothed by rollers. The unavoidable upsetting flash also on the side edges is then deburred and rounded.
The final rim contour is created on roller burnishing machines by three consecutive forming steps, each with three profile rollers. The contour of the tool rollers is transferred to the rim here.
Where necessary, flow forming is used to adapt the wall thickness and material distribution in the rim profile to the loads involved, thus saving more weight.
In the next operation the valve bore is produced on a rotary table. In the first station a flat attachment face is struck, from which the bore is punched in the second cycle. The cutting edges are then rounded on both sides by stamping.
Finally, the rim is drawn in a press onto a gage with the exact finishing dimension in order to create the tight concentricity and lateral running tolerances .
Joining the wheel disk and rim Joining the wheel disk and rim The process of joining the wheel disk to the rim creates the steel wheel. The two wheel parts wheel disk and rim are routed to a fully automated welding installation. On a small press they are aligned to each other and then joined to each other in a precisely specified position.
In the next station the assembly is connected by shielded arc welding with four to eight weld seams. These are deslagged and cleaned by rotating brushes adapted to the wheel. Then the wheel is calibrated to the finishing dimensions and made available for surface treatment.
The manufacturing process for steel : wheels is so precise that the blank wheel is able to move on to the painting plant without any mechanical reworking. There, as a general principle, it runs through cathodic dip coating and, if stipulated, is given an additional visually appealing finishing coat. Sheet steel wheels are characterized in particular by their robustness and, thanks to their low manufacturing costs, are offered in the entry level equipment specs of vehicle models.
Aluminum wheels Aluminum sheet wheels Aluminum sheet wheels For the most part, the basic manufacturing process is identical to that of the sheetsteel wheel. In view of the lower strength, the wall thickness must be greater compared with the sheet steel wheel. Despite engineers having full mastery of the technology, aluminum sheet wheels have not gained acceptance because steel wheels as a whole are the more economical wheel variant and the design options are very limited.
Aluminum forged wheels Aluminum forged wheels As the name suggests, a forged wheel is created by the hot forming of an aluminum round blank between two forming tools. The forming process takes place in two stages the forging of the wheel front and rear sides between two defined tools and the flow forming of the rim contour.
The starting material for aluminum forged wheels takes the form of 6 m long continuously cast bars of AlSi1Mg with a diameter of 200...300 mm, depending on the planned wheel size. After an ultrasonic test the cavity free bar sections are sawn off to a predefined length. The saw support a cylinder approx. 250 mm in diameter and 150 mm high is fed to the automated forging line. This consists of a heating furnace and up to four consecutive forging presses with forces of pressure of 8,000...40,000 kN. Parts are handled between the presses by robots. The result of this first forming process is blank with the finished design of the wheel disk, a punched out center hole and a ring shaped material reservoir positioned around the circumference with the material scheduled for the rim.
In flow forming operation involving three rollers the ring shaped disk is split open . Then the bolt holes and the valve hole are drilled and milled on a machining center. The concluding polishing process gives the wheel its  reflecting luster.
This high precision machining ensures that every wheel runs absolutely true. There is no radial or lateral run out. If small batch sizes do not justify the manufacture of a forging tool, a special form of forged wheel production is used. This involves the manufacture of a forged blank in the shape of a thick walled cylinder whose base is a disk representing the rotation contour of the design and of the inner side of the wheel. With high machining overhead, the wheel design is usually 100 % milled and the rim base first flowformed and then turned.
Aluminum cast wheels Aluminum cast wheels The most common method used is lowpressure mold casting. In the casting machine the aluminum molten mass tempered under controlled conditions is located in a crucible underneath the mold. The mold and crucible are connected by means of a feed tube. Once the mold is closed, the pressure in the crucible is increased to approx. 1 bar, causing the molten mass in the feed tube to rise and fill the mold.
Fusion heat is drawn off during the solidification process through precisely defined cooling channels in the mold. The specific cooling and heat removal during the solidification process and the casting parameters in their entirety are decisive factors for the casting quality.
In the X ray test all the blanks are tested for casting defects according to specifications stipulated by the customer. The  defective parts with casting defects that are not visible from the outside, e. g. porosity or shrink holes and inclusions or contaminants, are separated out and returned to the melting furnace.
The automated run is interrupted only before the painting stage so as to form production batches which are painted the same color.
Another way of manufacturing weightoptimized wheels is to insert lost cores in zones of the wheel subject to less stress. Thus, aluminum is replaced by cavities, for example in the spoke, but also much more rarely in the hump. Accordingly there are hollow spoke wheels and hollow hump wheels.
Squeeze cast process The squeeze cast process attempts to exploit the advantages of diecasting for aluminum wheels. An exactly portioned amount of molten aluminum is pressed under high pressure into a diecasting mold under exactly defined casting  parameters. The great advantage lies in the high solidification speed with positive effects on the material structure. Other advantages are the significantly lower  machining overhead and thus less material usage and the relatively high output and longer mold service life. This casting process is used in individual cases, but it requires special, relatively complex casting machines and molds. This process has yet to gain acceptance.
Wheel design variations: Singleor multiple part  design variation Sheet steel and aluminum sheet wheels consist of two parts. In this design wheel disk and rim are welded to each other. In the case of forged light alloy wheels and cast wheels, the one piece version dominates.
Multiple part versions, even those which are made of different materials , are available mainly for tuning applications and for sports vehicles. Multiple part wheels trace their origin back to motor sport. Mechanics exploited the advantage of being able to replace the damaged parts. In tuning applications, for example, the possibility of standardized rim rings and disks is used to create a large number of different wheel dimensions. For the most part, however, multiple parts no longer have a technical background and are now only used for visual reasons. Multiplepart wheels are subdivided into twoand three part wheels.
Wheel spider The wheel spider on cast wheels refers to the area of the spokes, which is represented in a steel wheel as the wheel disk and is for the most part provided with openings. Ventilation holes, slits and openings in the wheel disk or the wheel spider serve on the one hand to reduce weight, and on the other hand to ventilate the brake system and to enhance the  visual design of the wheel. Set against this is the present day requirement also to optimize the effects of the wheel with regard to the entire aerodynamics of the vehicle. Depending on the dynamic behavior of the body, a positive effect can be achieved here by keeping the area of the openings small and fashioning the geometry of the spokes as flat as possible. This measure has a more negative impact on the weight of the wheel such that it is now more common to find plastic parts on an aluminum wheel which are intended to aerodynamically optimize the wheel.
Rim variants Rims used for passenger cars, vans and light utility vehicles are almost always drop center rims with H2 double humps , tapered bead seats, and J section rim flange. Less common on smaller vehicles is the lower flange shape B, which today is used primarily in compact spare wheels. The higher flange shapes, JK and K, are rare on modern vehicles, and then only on heavy vehicles.
Lightweight construction  technologies Hollow spoke technology with sand casting cores or ceramic cores remaining  in the wheel also provides good possibilities to reduce weight, but it requires a suitable design and special manufacturing equipment. This process is also associated with higher costs.
More widely used today is the flow forming process for cast wheels, in which the rim base is only partly precast and then rolled out by machine to the corresponding rim width. The compressed material provides for thinner wall thicknesses with reduced weight in the rim base.
"Structural wheels" are used, among other things, as spare wheels or as road wheels with plastic wheel covers. Unrestricted by design conditions, the aim here is to use the minimum quantity of material possible to guarantee operating and functional safety, as well as streamline production costs for these wheels.
Wheel mounting: The design of the wheel and the mounting elements must meet safety requirements in all vehicle operating conditions. The wheel forces resulting from motive force, brakes, wheel load and wheel location must be supported by the overall mounting system  is essential when specifying the tightening torques in engineering design and in  practice.
The geometric configuration of the wheel mounts in pitch diameter, number and dimensioning of the mounting elements are subject to the needs and requirements of each vehicle manufacturer. The wheel on a passenger car is secured to the axle hub by three to five wheel bolts or wheel nuts inserted through the mounting holes. Off road vehicles and light utility vehicles often have six wheel bolts or wheel nuts. Commercial vehicles as a rule have ten wheel nuts, but this number can sometimes be even higher . The longitudinal bolt forces that are decisive for the durability of the bolted connection must be reached and adhered to, both when new and used, in all dynamic operating states.
The high degree of true running is achieved by means of a central wheel mount at  the wheel hub with a precise alignment shoulder.
At present, wheels mounted with a central nut and interlocking driving pins are used almost exclusively on racing cars. Wheel trims Wheel trims are mainly used for visual reasons on steel wheels and are affixed to the wheels using elastic retaining spring elements which are easily detachable. But today aluminum cast wheels also feature wheel trims, which are often intended to improve aerodynamics. The design of aluminum wheels is for the most part kept simple and the weight kept low. Bolted solutions are also used in rare cases. The material used most often for wheel caps is heat resistant plastic, e. g. polyamide 6. However, in some cases, aluminum and stainless pressed steel are also used.
Special wheel/tire systems TRX rim TRX rim More recent rim developments, which have produced in limited series, are the TR rim . They were developed by MICHELIN for use with matching TRX tires and provide more room for the brakes.
Rims made by DUNLOP with a Denloc groove also require special tires; at low tire pressure and also in the case of pressure loss, the system is supposed to prevent the tire from coming off the rim, enhancing safety and mobility.
The TD system brings : together both wheel/tire systems. As opposed to common practice, the two above designs are have rim and tire matched to each other and are unable to combine rim and tire with other tire versions, or only to a very limited extent.
CTS and CTS and PAX systems PAX systems The CTS/CWS and PAX systems were able to dispense with the need for a spare wheel. The original idea behind using these two systems to save on the spare wheel failed to catch on in the market and today these are used primarily on  armored vehicles .
Compact spare wheels Compact spare wheels For space saving reasons a compact spare wheel . Its benefits are the subject of debate, but it is becoming increasingly popular compared with a full size spare wheel.
In many countries it is no longer  required by law to carry a spare wheel.  Instead, vehicles are equipped with a puncture kit to repair any tire damage. The puncture kit consists of an electrically driven compressor and a sealant, which is pumped into the tire through the valve.
Stress and testing of wheels The extremely varied and complex stress conditions in the wheel as a component in conjunction with a wide variety of  operating conditions in the vehicle require specific endurance tests in order to be able to confirm the durability of a wheel with acceptable overhead. In general, the dynamic tests are run in test laboratories on standardized testing units, whereby a simulation of road operation that is close to reality is simulated and a good correlation of the test results to pure road  operation is achieved. Country specific legal requirements make special tests necessary, e. g. in the case of light alloy wheels the simulation of a side curb impact .
Testing of sheet steel wheels The critical zones on a sheet steel wheel are in particular the zones around the weld seams, mounting boreholes, dish , and ventilation holes. The operating conditions in each case, for example straight ahead driving and cornering, generate different damage patterns in the area of the welding seam on the drop center well and in the wheel disk. Tests of the material quality and of the welded joints as well as surface tests are backed up by the endurance tests and indicate the need to optimize wheel manufacturing.
Testing of light alloy wheels: Light alloy wheels run through a similar testing process whereby, unlike sheetsteel wheels, the more varied influencing parameters of material, manufacturing, and design mean that the test requirements are at a significantly higher level. This ensures that fluctuations in material and manufacturing are unable to lead to premature failure. The maximum stresses occur mainly on the back of the wheel in the supporting structure of the ribs and spokes, in rare cases on the visible side. The material quality and processing have a great influence on the durability of aluminum cast wheels. Inadequate physical values such as elasticity , with which the tolerances of the tire now overlap. This can positively or negatively influence the concentricity of the wheel with tire. "Matching" is used to facilitate optimum concentricity of a wheel with tire. In this process the wheel and the tire are positioned during fitting in relation to each other in such a way that the "concentricity high point" of the wheel matches up with the "low point" of the tire.
On the wheel the high point is determined from the concentricity measurements of the two tire seat areas. For each area an individual high point is obtained with different angular positions on the  circumference of the wheel. These two values produce through vector addition a common value with a resulting angular  position. This position is marked on  the wheel with a colored dot or an adhesive dot.
On the tire the low point corresponds to the position where it reaches the lowest force variation while rolling. It is also marked with a colored dot. From a technical viewpoint the tire can also be compared with a spring that exhibits a radial stiffness. Based on production the tire can never be manufactured to such precision that it exhibits a uniform stiffness over its entire circumference. Wheels with tires with poor concentricity make themselves felt on the vehicle not only through a radial movement of the body . In the direction of travel a minimal variable force from acceleration and braking is also experienced with each wheel rotation.
Good wheel centering is extremely important for commercial vehicles that travel at higher speeds, but also when the wheels in question are large and heavy. On commercial vehicles that travel at higher speeds in particular, the lowest possible radial and lateral run out on both rim bead seats and flanges is essential to ensuring smooth running. This increases safety and fuel economy.
Imbalance Imbalance Just as important as concentricity and lateral running to a smooth rolling wheel with tire is compensation of the differently distributed masses on the wheel and tire. To this end it is necessary to minimize the influences of the masses on the rotating
wheel with balance weights by balanc : ing. Normally passenger car wheels are dynamically balanced due to the rim width, i. e. measurements are taken on two planes . The ideal position for the balance weights on the wheel for dynamic balancing is the maximum distance to the rim center at as large a diameter as possible.
An imbalance, referred to as "residual imbalance", of 5 g per balance plane depending on the vehicle type and suspension is not discernible in the majority of vehicles. For each balance plane a balance weight should be attached at one position only. If a relatively high balance mass is required in a balance plane, it is recommended to turn the tire on the wheel and repeat the balancing process. The lower the balance weight mass on the wheel, the lower the residualimbalance potential also.
Narrow wheels for two wheeled vehicles are balanced on one plane only . This method is called static balancing.
a) Clip on or drive on weight on the inside and outside . 1 Balance weight with retaining spring clipped onto the rim flange, 2 Balance weight glued to the inside  of the wheel drop center, 3 Balance weight glued to the inside  of the rim bead seat.
The fundamental and visible material of a tire is rubber, an elastic to viscous material to which a tire owes the majority of its typical properties that are so important to the vehicle.
1 Nylon binding, 2 Steel belt assembly, 3 Radial textile cord plies .
Tire construction: Design and components Tires are a complex construction of different, mutually influencing raw materials, components and chemicals. A standard passenger car tire consists of up to 25 different components and up to 12 different rubber compounds.
Since 2010 the toxicologically serious softeners and paraffined oils have been subject to particularly stringent limits values in the EU. For this reason manufacturers are increasingly using uncritical natural oils .
Casing Casing The casing is stretched over a thin inner liner of airtight butyl rubber . Around 1,400 rubberized cords of rayon, nylon or polyester are combined in one or more casing plies to form the decisive strength member, the elastic "shell" of the tire. The cords run radially, i. e. at right angles to the tire plane from bead to bead hence the designation radial tire. Crossply tires, in which casing cords are placed diagonally to the tire plane, in practical terms no longer play a role in modern day applications.
Bead Bead The bead performs the important function of ensuring that the tire is securely and tightly seated on the rim. Driving and braking torques are transmitted via this crucial connecting point from the rim to the tire tread and thus to the road surface. Seated in the bead core is a cable of numerous steel wires, each of which can bear a load of up to 1,800 kg .
Sidewall Sidewall A thin and highly flexible rubber flank forms the sidewall and thus the flexible zone of the tire. The sidewall  is however also the area of the tire that is most sensitive to damage.
Trouble proof run flat tires on the other hand have much thicker sidewalls than conventional designs . In the event of a blow out the rim does not slump onto the tire casing and thus cannot damage it. In addition, fully deflated run flat tires ensure a certain degree of steerability and directional stability for a further 80 km at speeds of up to 80 km/h.
Cambering to : Cambering to blank blank The finished, cylindrical combination of casing, inner liner, bead and sidewalls is pushed over a drum, the outside diameter of which corresponds to the inside diameter of this preliminary tire stage and to that of the subsequent tire. On this drum the cylindrical combination is cambered into the "real" tire shape  and then built further.
Because the casing cords run radially, i. e. transversely, to the rolling direction, the casing on its own would not be able sufficiently to transmit lateral forces when cornering and peripheral forces when  accelerating and braking. It therefore needs support. This job is performed by the steel belt assembly placed on top. Two or more plies of twisted and brassand rubber coated steel wires for up to 30 minutes and acquires its final, typical appearance. The tread rubber creeps on heating  exactly and without cavities into the tire negative mold of the heating press, thus creating the tread pattern and the sidewall markings. As a result of sulfur added in a previous process the hitherto plastic rubber vulcanizes into elastic rubber and acquires its desired operating characteristics.
A finished tire of the standard size for the medium size car class 205/55 R 16 91 H weighs around 8.5 kg. A commercial vehicle tire of the standard size 385/65 R22.5 weighs around 75 kg.
Tire with wheel Tire with wheel Together with the rim, the tire valve and the balance weights the tire forms the car's operational wheel . The rubber elastic tire is inflated with compressed air, at which point it is able to absorb and transmit forces. Tire inflation pressure is usually 2...3.5 bar for a passenger car and 5...9 bar for a commercial vehicle. It is not the tire itself but rather the inflation air that supports the weight of the vehicle.
1 Hump, 2 Rim bead seat,  3 Rim flange, 4 Casing , 10 Bead apex,  11 Bead core with steel core,  12 Valve.
Differences between : Differences between commercial vehicle commercial vehicle and and passenger car tires passenger car tires Commercial vehicle tires and generally similar in design to passenger car tires, but are bigger, wider and heavier. Tire inflation pressure at 5...9 bar is much higher than approx. 2...3.5 bar for passenger car tires.
The primary development objective is, as with passenger car tires, to have all the parameters in proper proportion and above all the mileage. Commercialvehicle tires therefore have comparatively hard, low wear treads which are also  regroovable and retreadable. Retreading of a bald tire identified as such is possible if the tire casing is undamaged.
Although the rolling resistance of a truck tire is lower than that of a passenger car tire, its influence on the truck fuel consumption is greater due to the higher vehicle weight and the number of axles. In addition to high load capacity , other important tire characteristics include good straight running stability, good cornering stability and traction. The trend in truck tires is towards increasingly smaller tire dimensions. This increases the useful load height and thus the transport volume.
Tire inflation pressure Motor vehicle manufacturers specify two values for tire inflation pressure for every vehicle the part load air pressure for a partly laden vehicle and the full load air pressure for a fully laden vehicle or high driving speeds. The values are based first and foremost on the vehicle weight, on its top speed, on the tire design, and on the tire size. As a rule, the front and rear axles are subject to different desired pressures. The tire inflation pressure may only be measured and adjusted on a tire that is cold, i. e. that has not been heated up by vehicle operation.
Tire tread: A tire is provided over its entire circumference with geometrically shaped tread grooves, ribs and channels as well as additional notches forming gripping edges .
The most important function of the integrated tread . The braking distance on wet roads increases as tire wear increases.
Minimum tread depth Summer tires Summer tires The minimum tread depth prescribed by law .
Winter tires Winter tires The minimum tread depth for winter tires varies greatly from country to country. In Austria, for example, winter tires for passenger cars are required to have a minimum tread depth of 4.0 mm.
Wear detection aid Wear detection aid The main tread groove base features several rubber bumps exactly 1.6 mm high spread across the entire tread for the purpose of checking the minimum tread depth prescribed by law of 1.6 mm. If such a wear marker  on the tire makes contact with the road surface, the tire may no longer be used in road traffic.
Truck tires bearing the wording "Regroovable" on their sidewalls may be regrooved by the regrooving depth approved by the tire manufacturer , ideally when the remaining tread depth is still 2 to 4 mm. Essentially, passenger car tires are not permitted to be regrooved.
Aquaplaning At higher speeds or when there is an enclosed layer of water on the road the tread the tread is no longer able to absorb sufficient water in itself and disperse it to the sides and to the rear. A wedge of water forces its way between the tires and the road, the tires lose contact with the road, and the vehicle loses its controllability aquaplaning occurs .
The tire loses contact at precisely the : stage when the pressure of the wedgeshaped splash water in front of the tire exceeds the pressure of the tire on the road. This pressure is squared as the driving speed increases. Because the critical pressure at which the tire aquaplanes is approximately equal to the internal tire pressure, passenger car tires with an  inflation pressure of approx. 2.3 bar aquaplane at a much lower speed than truck tires with 8 bar. Driving with a lower inflation pressure than prescribed decreases the already low speed from which aquaplaning occurs, once again significantly in passenger car tires.
Tire contour, tread design and tread depth can defer the speed from which the risk of aquaplaning arises. Narrow tires, due to the higher pressure on the road , essentially aquaplane at higher speeds than wide tires, and they also heave to channel a much smaller volume of water. Drainage channels and rounded contact surfaces on wide tires reduce their risk of aquaplaning to an acceptable level. To compare: A tire with a nominal width of 220 mm must at 80 km/h and a rainwater height of 3 mm disperse roughly 15 liters per second so as not to aquaplane. This figure is 10 liters for a 140 mm "narrow" tire.
the tread depth is of crucial importance to road safety: The braking distance on a road wet with rain is roughly 50 % longer with an almost bald tire .
__________ u02.  in m.
These calculated differences however can in practice only be effected by highly experienced drivers with extremely fast reactions. Many car drivers are not accustomed to ABS full braking; the total braking distance is lengthened significantly. Potentially shorter braking tires only get a look in if the vehicle is fitted with a brake assistant.
from 80 km/h to a step on a wet road  with new tires and with bald tires A Braking distance  with 8 mm tread depth: 42.3 m.
Slip angle and slip Slip angle and slip Only the tires rolling under an angle to the wheel rolling plane  transmit simultaneously and within physical limits the forces requested by the driver through steering, braking and accelerating. Conversely: A tire that does not roll or slip at an angle does not transmit any forces.
The tire transmits ever higher forces as the slip angle and slip increase. This relationship however is not linear. The effect is reversed after a relevant maximum value is reached . Excessive slip is a consequence of excessive acceleration or excessively heavy braking. If the steering angle or brake pressure is increased further, the wheels lock if the vehicle is not fitted with an antilock braking system. The slip is then 100 %.
2  cannot exceed the value uhFz. This situation can be explained by reference to the Kamm . The radius of the Kamm circle is equal to the maximum horizontal force uh Fz that can be transmitted via the tire. The maximum side force Fy is therefore smaller is at the same time a force Fx occurs in the peripheral direction. With the forces Fx and Fy marked in Figure 9 the wheel is exactly at the limit of the maximum horizontal force that can be transmitted.
Tire grip: Generation of grip Tires must transmit all the dynamic forces to only four roughly postcard sized areas. The grip required for this purpose between the tire contact patches and the road surface is generated by several simultaneously occurring phenomena. These are essentially positive locking  and adhesion by molecular forces of attraction.
block of the tire tread runs into this forcibly flattening contact patch, deforms, and is "ejected" again at the other end. Relative movements and thus slip are generated in this contact patch: Each individual rubber block more or less slips during the dwell time in the contact patch.
patch the tread block under consideration comes up against a bump in the asphalt, is upset, and slips off again on the other side of the bump at accelerated speed. Only when it produces slip in the process can it build up in the tangential direction a counterforce contrary to the rolling direction which counteracts the sliding and thus permits the transmission of steering, drive or braking forces.
and load removal  of a viscoelastic substance 1 Strain, force per unit of area, 2 Deformation, elongation or upsetting relative to output variable.
On account of its viscoelastic properties a : rubber block does not revert immediately to its original shape after deformation; the strain follows on from the deformation that causes it . The component of the friction force parallel to the road surface thus facilitates the transmission of drive or braking forces.
The principle of positive locking grip also functions on damp and wet micro and macro rough road surfaces, but with limited effectiveness. Figure 13 shows that microfine asphalt points can penetrate the layer of moisture and thus the interlocking effect is maintained. However, an enclosed layer of water forms over the more rounded local bumps.
Essential to the interlocking effect is the presence of microand macroscopically small road irregularities. On a completely smooth surface there would be no interlocking effect at all.
The interlocking effect and inner molecular friction cause the tire to heat up. The resulting loss of energy is jointly responsible for the tire's rolling resistance, which makes up around 20...25 % of a vehicle's fuel consumption.
Adhesion Adhesion Molecular adhesion is created by the interaction and intensive contact between tire and dry road. The creation and subsequent breaking up of adhesive connections at the contact points result in a contribution to the coefficient of friction . On a wet road molecular adhesion fails while the interlocking effect remains effective.
The frequency range of molecular adhesion, excited by the micro rough road surface during drastic braking and extreme cornering, encompasses the spectrum of 106...109 Hz.
Load frequency and temperature Load frequency and temperature Two further important influencing factors on the quality of grip must be mentioned: If the tire when rolling is only excited with a low frequency .
In parallel, rubber part exhibits pronounced heat dependence behavior: In the glass temperature range when for example winter ambient temperatures cause the rubber compound to harden and become brittle . Conversely, higher forces can be transmitted when the tire is moved in its optimum operating temperature range.
on a damp or wet road surface 1 Macro roughness channels  and stores the water,  but cannot penetrate the water layer.
Compound developers are able to design rubber compounds with a glass temperature of between 60 degC and 0 degC at a frequency of 10 Hz.
of frequency and temperature Frequency 50 1 102 104 106 108 0 50 100 150 degC Temperature Glass behavior Hz Rubber behavior SFR0058E b Energy loss Temperature Rubber behavior Glass behavior Range of maximum energy loss 
Rolling resistance: Definition of terminology Tractive resistances inhibit the forward movement of the vehicle and must be overcome by motive means. In addition to the aerodynamic drag, the frictional resistances in moving engine, transmission and chassis/suspension components, the climbing resistance, and inertia forces, the rolling resistance of tires is classed as one of the main tractive resistances. It contributes to approx. 20 % of the fuel consumption on expressways/interstates, approx. 25 % on orbital roads and approx. 30 % on urban and ordinary roads . Rolling resistance decreases thus result directly in consumption and emission reductions. Rolling resistance . The dimensionless rollingresistance coefficient cRR denotes the ratio of rolling resistance force to vehicle weight.
values for cRR for passenger car tires on asphalt amount to 0.006 to 0.012, the  value for truck tires to 0.004 to 0.008.
Rolling resistance optimized tires have additional designations such as "Eco", "Green" or "Energy". Tire designers could indeed immediately and quite significantly reduce the rolling resistance by choosing rubber grades with low hysteresis and thus a low energy loss, but, as already explained, this would reduce the grip values to unacceptable levels. In other words, lower fuel consumption comes at the expense of less grip.
Generation of rolling resistance With each wheel rotation the tire is deformed during the forcible flattening in the contact patch by flexion, upsetting and shearing of the rubber blocks and of the proportional tire casing , during which the tire performs flexing work. This produces a viscoelastically caused energy loss in the form of non utilizable heat. This heat loss makes up 90 % of the rolling resistance.
Narrow tires and higher tire inflation pressure do increase the rolling resistance because contact patch and flexing work are reduced. However, designers are subject to very tight limits in terms of their scope of action in that the catalog of requirements with regard to handling performance, grip level and comfort are in direct conflict. Nevertheless, the technical specifications of the tire industry for future tire generations already feature tire dimensions such as 115/65 R 15 for subcompact size cars and 205/50 R 21 for medium size cars. Further drastic  rolling resistance reductions are not achievable with the requirements still standard today with regard to vehicle size, weight, maximum speed, sportiness, and comfort.
Even increasing the tire inflation pressure : by 1 bar above the recommended value will only deliver a rolling resistance reduction of 15 %. In a vehicle with an assumed fuel consumption of 10 l / 100 km this would only produce a saving of 1.6 %. But because drivers still neglect to check tire pressure, the rolling resistance reductions achieved in the most recent development cycles are not always implemented in real driving conditions. In addition, there is a direct conflict of aims between rollingresistance optimization and the wet grip essential to road safety.
Conflict of aims between  rolling resistance and grip Frequency ranges Frequency ranges The deformations of the tread and rubber blocks caused by microand macroroughness in the contact area between road surface and tire surface which generate the grip potential due to viscoelasticity occur in the very high frequency range of 103...1010 Hz. The energy loss caused by hysteresis is high here, resulting in the creation of high grip values.
However, the frequency spectrum which is important to rolling resistance is much lower at 1...100 Hz precisely the range in which the inner tire structure is excited with each wheel rotation. At a driving speed of 100 km/h a passenger car tire is deformed roughly 15 times per second, equating to a load frequency of 15 Hz. Tire designers nonetheless refer here to lowfrequency excitation of the tire structure, particularly the casing.
Optimization incompatibility Optimization incompatibility These greatly differing frequency ranges explain the basic optimization incompatibility of simultaneously high values for grip and low rolling resistance. In conventional tires using industrial soot as the primary filler as a gray powdered filler, which increasingly replaced the standard industry soot used up that point. Together with auxiliary binding materials, or silanes, the conflict of interests between rolling resistance, grip and abrasion resistance can be elevated to a high level of compromise.
Silica based rubber compounds exhibit low energy losses in the low frequency range relevant to rolling resistance, but high energy losses in the high frequency rubber grip range . The curve for energy absorption has this rise steeply and thus advance in frequencies of 102...104 Hz. This results in tires which have low rolling resistance but nevertheless very good grip.
of energy loss 1 Rubber compound with distinct  hysteresis .
Rolling resistance and air pressure: Reduced tire pressure means increased flexing work and thus higher rolling resistance and impaired steering precision and braking stability.
Safety checks carried out in 2009 by the tire industry . The upshot of excessively low tire pressure is that fuel is wasted.
Tire designation Definition of terminology According to EU Directives ECE 30  .
mation about the maximum load capacity of the tire in question for the top speed corresponding to the speed symbol. This regulation is binding in all EU member states and in Switzerland.
On tires with directional treads together with the rim.
SFR0064 4E 195 / 65 R 15 91 V Tire width in mm R for Radial tire D for Diagonal Load capacity Speed symbol Tire cross section Ratio of height to width in % DO T A B C D 12 14
may be driven with this tire at a speed not exceeding 210 km/h, even if the vehicle is designed to reach an higher final speed. Load capacity reductions must be taken into account from speed index V and  upwards.
A1 up to  5 km/h L up to 120 km/h A2 up to 10 km/h M up to 130 km/h A3 up to 15 km/h N up to 140 km/h A4 up to 20 km/h P up to 150 km/h A5 up to 25 km/h Q up to 160 km/h A6 up to 30 km/h R up to 170 km/h A7 up to 35 km/h S up to 180 km/h A8 up to 40 km/h T up to 190 km/h B up to 50 km/h U up to 200 km/h C up to 60 km/h H up to 210 km/h D up to 65 km/h V up to 240 km/h F up to 80 km/h W up to 270 km/h G up to 90 km/h ZR over 240 km/h J up to 100 km/h Y up to 300 km/h K up to 110 km/h over 300 km/h
Example: 1214 means the 12th week of : the year 2014. Prior to the year 2000 the designation of the production date had only three digits.
called for in response to the widespread traffic chaos in the USA in 1995. A winter tire should satisfy certain criteria with regard to its suitability for winter driving conditions and verify this by way of appropriate tests. This gave rise to the designation 3PMSF , which today is firmly established in North American legislation.
This designation has also be used voluntarily for a few years in Europe. This is intended to verify to the consumer suitability for winter driving conditions substantiated by tests. The test criteria are defined by the European Union in  UN ECE R 117 .
For truck and bus tires on the steering axle the introduction of this regulation will be deferred until no later than 1 July 2020. This time will be used to check as part of a study the necessity of the new winter tire regulation for the steering axle of these vehicle categories. The deferment of the winter tire regulation does not apply to the permanently driven axles of these vehicles.
Sound identification: Tires featuring this marking comply with Directive ECE 2001/43 , which lays down the maximum values for rolling noise. This marking has been mandatory since 1 October 2009, is featured next to the UN/ECE approval mark, and can be recognized by the code letter "s" after the homologation number.
With the introduction of the tire label on 1 November 2012 this designation for new tire types was extended by a capital "S" and by the letters "W" for wet grip and "R" for rolling resistance .
the buyer with quick and unmistakable information on the three tire properties of rolling resistance, wet grip , thereby helping them to make a more informed decision to purchase. The winter properties of winter tires are currently not recorded by the EU tire label.
professional off road tires, racing tires, : spikes, compact spare wheel tires, vintage car and modern classic car tires , tires for top speeds below 80 km/h, tires with inside diameters of less than 254 mm or more than 635 mm, and motorcycle tires.
Naturally, the tire label cannot show all the tire criteria , but the criteria selected do represent a certain combination of many other linked properties.
Fuel consumption Fuel consumption Letters from A  provide information on the tire's wet grip when braking. The difference in wet grip between a particularly good tire and a poor tire when applying full brakes from 80 km/h to zero produces an 18 meter shorter braking distance.
Tire noise Tire noise Pass by noise is depicted in the EU label by a symbol together with an indication of the dB value. The symbol is based on the binding noise emission limit values. The more sound waves are shaded black in the EU label, the louder the tire.
Winter tires Technical characteristics Passenger car winter tires exhibit no or only slight differences in structural design from summer tires. They are characterized by good force transmission  on snow and mud, satisfactory grip on ice, good adhesion on wet and dry road surfaces, safe handling, comfortable rolling, and low noise.
The feature that is unique to them is primarily the softer and elastic when cold rubber compound with high natural rubber content. Unlike the summer rubber compound, it does not become brittle and harden .
Added to this are increased tread area  offer additional gripping edges in the snow and increase both traction and braking performance noticeably.
As the tread depth decreases, but also with increasing age the winter properties diminish: Traction and cornering stability potential deteriorate, the braking distance is extended, and the risk of aquaplaning increases. Winter tires identified for example in Austria under a remaining tread depth of 4 mm are always classed as summer tires.
Development of a tire: The tire is always a compromise product: If a particular property . There is a conflict of aims when on principle contrasting properties are to be simultaneously optimized. Modern rubber compounds with a high silica filler content and optimized ground contact patches raise this balancing act to a higher level, but this does not eliminate the conflict.
The conflicting development aims which can negatively influence each other include grip potential and rolling resistance, dry braking and wet braking, aquaplaning and dry handling, and grip and abrasion.
Tire tests Tire manufacturers conduct around fifty objective laboratory tests and subjective road tests on in house test and racing  circuits. The most important tests are: Handling on a dry road Handling on a dry road Criteria are directional stability, steering precision, straight running stability, noise, and tire comfort.
Properties in the wet Properties in the wet Criteria are handling on a wet course with bends, braking, aquaplaning, longitudinal and lateral, and circular course driving. Machine tests Machine tests Criteria are top speed, continuous running, and abrasion.
 Council Directive 89/459/EEC of 18 July 1989 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the tread depth of tyres of certain categories of  motor vehicles and their trailers.
 Source: Continental AG, 2011. The specified brake differences were determined with a Mercedes C Class car on 205/55 R 16 V size tyres in over 1,000 brake tests.
 ECE 54: Regulation No. 54 Uniform provisions concerning the approval of pneumatic tyres for commercial vehicles and their trailers.
________________________________ Regulation No. 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning type approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles, their trailers and systems, components and separate technical units intended therefore.
 Council Directive 92/23/EEC of 31 March 1992 relating to tyres for motor vehicles and their trailers and to their fitting installation.
 Regulation No. 117 of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe  Uniform provisions concerning the approval of tyres with regard to rolling sound emissions and/or to adhesion on wet surfaces and/or to rolling resistance.
Tire pressure : monitoring systems Application Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems  are used to monitor the tire pressure on vehicles to prevent tire defects due to insufficient tire pressure, thus reducing the number of accidents resulting from defective tires.
If a vehicle is operated with insufficient tire pressure, this leads to increased flexing energy on the tire sidewalls and thus to increased wear of the tire. When operated at full load or at high speed, the greater flexing energy results in increased thermal load, which can even cause tire bursts. Following a spate of severe fatal accidents in the USA due to tire bursts caused by insufficient inflation pressure, legislation was passed to regulate the nationwide introduction of tire pressure monitoring systems in the USA in order to warn drivers about low tire inflation pressure at an early stage in the future. Since September 2007, all new cars have been required to be fitted with tire pressure monitoring systems which detect both tire damage and slow pressure losses through the tire rubber caused by gas diffusion.
The tire inflation pressure, however, is not only an important variable for traffic safety. Ride comfort, tire service life, and fuel consumption are also significantly influenced by the inflation pressure. Inflation pressure reduced by 0.6 bar can increase fuel consumption by up to 4 % in urban traffic and shorten the service life of the tire by up to 50 %. In the European Union , the decision has been taken to prescribe the fitting of tire pressure monitoring systems in all new cars as from  October 2012 in order to help reduce CO2 emissions.
Already today the rising proportion of tires with run flat properties necessitates the deployment of tire pressure monitoring systems, as the car driver is no longer able to detect a tire with a considerable pressure deficiency on the basis of the drivability. In order to prevent the driver from inadvertently exceeding the speed and range limits that apply in this case, run flat tires may only be used in conjunction with tire pressure monitoring systems.
Directly measuring systems In directly measuring systems, a sensor module with a pressure sensor is installed in each tire of the vehicle. This transfers data such as the tire pressure and tire temperature from inside the tire across a coded high frequency transmission link to a control unit. The control unit evaluates these data in order to detect not only pressure losses in individual tires . If the tire pressure falls below a specified threshold or if the pressure gradient exceeds a certain value, the driver is warned by a visual or acoustic signal.
The sensor modules are usually integrated into the tire valve. As a rule, they are supplied by a battery. In comparison with other applications, this results in additional requirements with regard to power consumption, media resistance, and sensitivity to acceleration. Micromechanical absolute pressure sensors are used as sensor elements.
The data measured with the pressure and temperature sensor in the tire are processed in the sensor module, modulated on a HF carrier signal .
Directly measuring systems do not need a reset function if they have a fixed, constant pressure loss warning threshold. For such a system to work, the vehicle must only have one prescribed inflation pressure, regardless of vehicle load and tire size. As soon as different inflation pressures have to be set in the vehicle, a directly measuring system also needs a reset function to be able to adapt the warning threshold accordingly.
real measurement of the tire pressure : and temperature, and their functioning is not dependent on specific tire types, vehicle conditions and road conditions. The disadvantages of direct systems compared with indirect systems are the much higher system costs, the additional logistical costs in the field of maintaining the availability of all the design variants, the follow up costs for each new rim, and their battery dependent, limited service life.
Indirectly measuring systems In indirectly measuring systems, pressure loss in the tires is not determined directly, but rather by means of a derived variable. To achieve this, these systems perform a mathematical statistical evaluation of the speed differences of all wheels for "puncture detection", and if necessary also an evaluation of a wheel natural frequency shift for "diffusion detection". In vehicles with antilock braking or driving dynamics control systems, the wheel speed required for this is determined by sensors that are already present and transferred to the control unit. Speed differences occur when pressure loss reduces the rolling circumference of the corresponding tire, thus increasing its speed relative to the other three wheels. The subtraction, which can be implemented using a lowcost extension of the software algorithms in the antilock braking or driving dynamics control system, enables detection of high pressure losses on up to three tires. The wheel natural frequency spectrum of the individual wheels is evaluated to enable a simultaneous pressure loss at all four wheels to be detected. Typically, the maximum wheel natural frequency shifts at a pressure loss of 20 % from 40 Hz to approximately 38 Hz.
Indirectly measuring systems must necessarily be calibrated to the nominal pressure. A calibration is initiated by operating the reset button. When the reset function is activated, the system stores the current learning values on the next few kilometers as new reference values, based on the current rolling circumferences and wheel natural frequency characteristics. The warning capability takes effect after approx. ten minutes of driving time.
The driver is required to activate the reset function to recalibrate the system when one or more tires are changed, the tire positions are changed .
Advantages of indirectly measuring systems are their lower system costs and their robustness over the service life of vehicles, since no additional components are required. Because the system is linked to the vehicle and not to the wheels, no further costs are incurred in the field for logistics and spare parts. A disadvantage is the system's dependence on the specific tire, resulting in a wider variation of the detection times and in higher costs for adapting the system's function to the tire dimensions permitted for a particular vehicle. The system's dependence on mileage and road surface also influences the detection times.
Fulfillment of statutory requirements As things stand, both systems satisfy the statutory requirements in North America and Europe with regard to "puncture  detection" and "diffusion detection". Statutory provisions for tire pressure monitoring systems are also being drafted in China and Korea.
SAM0210 1Y: Rotary seal for tire pressure control Function The Turcon PTFE rotary seal was developed for tire pressure control purposes in order to seal around the axle of the central tire pressure system only when required and always when the tire pressure is increased or decreased. In conventional seal concepts the seal remains in permanent contact with the axle that bears the seal. This causes friction, which in turn leads to increased fuel consumption. By avoiding friction in pressureless operation this rotary seal necessarily reduces fuel consumption.
Application The Turcon Roto L was originally developed primarily for off road vehicles to adapt the tire inflation pressure to the ground. On asphalt surfaces a high tire inflation pressure is required, whereas on dirt tracks a low tire inflation pressure is advantageous.
The use of this tire pressure control can also produce benefits for trucks. It facilitates the extension of tire pressure control systems and produces benefits for trucks with long loading areas or different semitrailers in which the tire pressure could be optimized for the respective road and load conditions. This would increase traction and safety and help to deliver significant fuel savings to transport companies.
Performance and passenger cars are a further target market. When sports cars are driving at low speeds the tire pressure should be kept low. At high speeds the handling performance is improved if the tire pressure can be set to high or, depending on the road surface, set differently at each wheel. Furthermore, it can be used as a safety system in the event of a blow out in order to inflate the system with air until the driver reaches the nearest repair shop.
Design The Turcon Roto L combines a polytetrafluoroethylene . The seal's design ensures that during pressure build up the sealing lip is pressed against the mating sealing surface. As the pressure decreases, the relaxing elastomer area, which acts like a spring, returns the sealing lip to its neutral initial position. Seal wear Seal wear A further important effect on the performance of the Turcon Roto L with regard to the service life of the overall system is the significantly reduced shaft run in. This is due on the one hand to the use of a special seal material which is filled with a complex mixture of non abrasive mineral fibers and on the other hand to the low friction when the seal is not activated.
A conventional standard seal used today in a tire pressure control system already exhibits a shaft run in of around 10 um after 168 hours. In comparison, the Turcon Roto L has a shaft run in of around 4 um after 780 hours . In other words, the service life of a sealing system with this rotary seal is at least four times longer.
Benefits One benefit of this concept is that it extends the seal life. If the seal in a vehicle is only used for around 10 % of the axle system's service life, it remains operational and fit for use over the system's entire service life.
Even more important, however, is the elimination of friction when there is no pressurization. This means considerable fuel savings for the vehicle operator. Because the seal generates less than half the friction of conventional seal solutions, the tire pressure can also be reduced or increased during driving. In the case of large commercial vehicle tires it can take 20 to 30 minutes to adjust the tire pressure. If this can be done en route while the vehicle is driving, the vehicle can be active for up to 30 minutes instead of standing idle. This means a reduction of overall costs for the operator.
________________________________ References for rotary seal  References for rotary seal  for tire pressure control for tire pressure control DIN 3760: Rotary shaft lip type seals; 1996.
Purpose of automotive : steering systems The direction of vehicles of any kind is changed with the steering. In single track vehicles, for example motorcycles, steering is performed by turning the pivoted front fork in the steering head . In two track vehicles kingpin steering as described in the following is used.
In road vehicles the wheels on the front axle are steered; in some vehicle models the wheels on the rear axle also steer. Rear axle steering reduces the turning circle at low speeds and increases the driving dynamics at high speeds.
Kingpin steering In a kingpin steering system the two wheels are each secured to a pivoted steering knuckle . The rotary movement is introduced via the steering arms rigidly connected to the steering knuckle by the two tie rods actuated by the steering box. The casing of the steering box is permanently connected to the vehicle. The rotary movement is introduced via the steering column, at the upper end of which the steering wheel is located.
1 Steering knuckle  with steering arm, 2 Tie rod, 3 Steering box  with servo unit, 4 Steering column.
The automatic return to the straightahead position is achieved above all by the caster offset. Inclining the swivel axes in the direction of travel towards the rear moves the piercing point of the swivel axis through the road surface in the direction of travel ahead of the wheel contact point and consequently the wheels are pulled in the direction of travel.
Classification of automotive steering systems Muscular energy steering system Muscular energy steering system The required steering forces are generated exclusively by the muscular energy of the driver. These steering systems are currently used in the smallest vehicle categories.
Power assisted steering system Power assisted steering system The steering forces are generated by the muscular energy of the driver and by an additional auxiliary force hydraulically and increasingly electrically. This steering system is currently the type typically used in passenger cars and commercial vehicles. Power steering system Power steering system The steering forces are generated exclusively by non muscular .
Steering kinematics and axle design must be such that, although the driver receives feedback on the adhesion between wheels and road surface, the steering wheel is not subjected if possible to any forces from the spring motion of the wheels or from motive forces . Furthermore, damping properties must be utilized to ensure that no vibration, caused by road irregularities for exampled, occurs in the steering train.
Jolts from irregularities in the road surface should be damped as much as possible during transmission to the steering wheel. But, in the process, the required haptic feedback from the road to the driver must not be lost.
Statutory requirements Displacement and time synchronization when the steering system is operated is required by law. A rigid, zero play configuration of all the components in the steering train helps to achieve this and causes the slightest steering wheel movements by the driver to be translated into changes of direction at the steered wheel. This property is particularly important in the range of the straight ahead position. This makes possible safe, precise, and fatigue free vehicle guidance.
A further statutory requirement is the tendency of the steering to return automatically to the straight ahead position. This is achieved by appropriate axle kinematics and a low friction design of the components in the steering train.
2 Or steering lock in case this value is not reached. 3 50 daN for non articulated vehicles, with two or more steered axles,  excluding friction steered axles.
to the driver's seat): When the vehicle is : driven tangentially out of a circle with a radius of 50 m at a speed of 50 km/h, no unusual vibrations may occur in the steering system. In vehicles of the other categories, this behavior must be substantiated at a speed of 40 km/h or, if this value is not reached, at top speed.
Types of steering box The specified steering system requirements have given rise above all to two fundamental types of steering box. Both types can be utilized in pure muscular energy steering systems or, in combination with appropriate servo systems, as power assisted steering systems.
1 Steering gear box with rack, 2 Steering spindle with pinion, 3 Steering mounting, 4 Gaiter, 5 Tie rods with outer links, 6 Steering pinion, 7 Rack with toothing.
ratio around the center of the steering. : At the same time, it is possible with a direct ratio arrangement in the range of medium and large steering angles to reduce the necessary steering angle requirement when turning from lock to lock.
Power assisted steering systems for passenger cars The upshot of the increasing size and weight of vehicles and the heightened comfort and safety requirements involved is that in the last few years power assisted steering has gained acceptance in all vehicle categories down to the compact car segment. These steering systems are, but for a few exceptions, already installed as standard. The steering forces exerted by the drive are boosted by a hydraulic or an electric servo system. This servo system must be such that the driver receives good feedback on the adhesion conditions between the tires and the road surface at all times, and yet negative influences caused by road surface jolts are effectively damped.
Control valve Control valve The control valve provides the working cylinder with an oil pressure that corresponds to the rotary force of the steering wheel . For this purpose, a torsion bar spring is used to convert the operating torque into proportional actuator travel inside the valve. The actuator travel changes opening cross sections inside the valve and thereby control the oil and pressure ratios in the working cylinder. Control valves are built according to the "open center" principle, i.e., when the control valve is not actuated, the oil delivered by the pump flows back to the oil reservoir at zero pressure.
This produces in the parking range and when driving slowly low operating forces, which then increase as the speed increases. In this way, precise and accurate steering is possible at high speeds.
Working cylinder Working cylinder The double action working cylinder integrated in the steering box converts the applied oil pressure into an assisting force which acts on the rack and intensifies the steering force exerted by the driver. As the working cylinder has to have extremely low friction, particularly high demands are made on the piston and rod seals.
1 Power steering pump, 2 Control bushing, 3 Rotary slide, 4 Left working cylinder  chamber, 5 Right working cylinder  chamber, 6 Oil reservoir.
Energy source: Energy source The energy source consists of a vanetype supply pump with an integrated oilflow regulator, an oil reservoir, and connecting hoses and pipes. The pump must be dimensioned so that it makes available the required oil pressure and the required oil quantity for parking maneuvers, even when the engine is just idling.
To provide protection against overload, steering systems contain a pressure relief valve which is usually integrated in the pump. The pump and the components in the hydraulic working circuit must be designed so that no offending noise is generated and the operating temperature of the hydraulic fluid does not rise to an excessive level.
Alternatively, the pump for the energy supply of the steering can also be driven by an electric motor. The pump is usually designed as a gear or roller cell pump. The pump can be mounted in a variety of locations due to the omission of the belt drive for the internal combustion engine. Thanks to an electronic control module which evaluates signals like the vehicle or steering speed, the pump's rotational speed can be adapted to the steering's current energy demand and to the driving situation, and consequently greater energy efficiency can be achieved.
1 Toothing for steering wheel, 2 Upper steering column, 3 Torque sensor, 4 Electric motor,  5 ECU, 6 Helical gear drive, 7 Intermediate steering shaft, 8 Steering spindle connection, 9 Mechanical rack and pinion  steering, 10 Steering box, 11 Gaiter, 12 Tie rod, 13 Outer link, 14 Drive pinion  , 15 Recirculating ball and  toothed belt gear.
This system is used in vehicles with low steering forces converts the torque provided by the electric motor into the servo assisting torque and transmits it to the rack. The drive pinion ratio is not dependent on the steering ratio; this makes possible a power optimized design with 10 % to 15 % more system power.
Paraxial servo unit To convert the rotary movement of the steering wheel into a linear motion of the rack, this system uses a gear concept consisting of toothed belt and recirculating ball gear. A system with ball recirculation is used in the ball and screw spindle drive. The ball chain is returned through a channel integrated in the recirculating ball nut. The slip free toothed belt is able to transmit the torque reliably.
Servomotor Servomotor Brushed or brushless DC motors are used as servomotors. Depending on the required performance capability of the steering the design of the reduction gear, the torque generated by these motors is 3 to over 10 Nm.
Activation of the motor and hence the power consumption itself are demand oriented; in other words, only when assisting power is actually required is the vehicle electrical system subjected to load extending beyond the stand by power input. Reduction gear Reduction gear Primarily two principles are used in the reduction gear.
1 Helical gear, 2 Drive pinion, 3 Overload safety, 4 Locating bearing, 5 Housing, 6 Worm, 7 Spring damper element.
Helical gear drive: When a helical gear drive is used . It is important to ensure in the design of the helical gear drive that there is no tendency to self lock when turning back as a result of the rack force.
or additionally reduced by an upstream belt transmission stage, a ball and screw spindle drive, which converts the rotary movement into linear motion of the rack. Torque sensor Torque sensor To deliver the assisting force in line with demand, the driver manual torque is measured by the torque sensor integrated in the steering system, the required servo force is calculated in the electric ECU, and the motor is activated accordingly. The assisting force is delivered by the motor on the basis of torque control .
Functions Functions Further functions are executed in the ECU software to optimize the steering behavior. The ECU evaluates further signals from the vehicle or the steering for this purpose. Thus, for example, the resetting movement of the steering wheel is optimized as a function of the steering angle and the driving speed by an additional motor torque. Likewise, a damping function is implemented with the information on driving speed and steering speed; this function supports the straight ahead stability of the steering and hence of the vehicle at high driving speeds.
By networking the steering ECU with other ECUs in the vehicle network, it is possible to realize assistance functions with the electromechanical power assisted steering to enhance comfort and safety.
Demand oriented control of the electric motor leads to considerable fuel savings of 0.3 l/100 km on average compared to hydraulic power steering with a pump driven by the vehicle engine. In urban driving, the fuel savings increase to 0.7 l/100 km.
In the event of a failure of the energy supply or steering assistance, the driver can continue to steer mechanically, but with higher manual steering torque.
Superimposed steering With a superimposed steering system, an additional steering angle can be added to or subtracted from the steering wheel angle set by the driver at the steering wheel. This system is usually combined with a parameterizable hydraulic or an electric power assisted steering system. Superimposed does not facilitate autonomous driving, but it does provide for a steering characteristic optimally adapted to the driving situation, and thus maximum comfort and directional stability. When networked with driving dynamics control systems, it can further increase safety in critical driving situations by means of driver independent steering adjustments. Such steering systems are already in series production, known as Active Steering at BMW and Dynamic Steering at Audi.
Planetary gear set A twin planetary gear set with different gear ratios of the gear stages is integrated into a common planetary gear carrier in the steering train . This means there is always a mechanical link between the steering wheel and the steered wheels. The different gear ratios of the gear stages mean that turning the planetary gear carrier sets the additional steering angle. The angle setting is made by a electric motor that drives the worm gear of the planetary gear carrier.
with harmonic drive 1 Electric motor with harmonic drive, 2 Steering column, 3 Intermediate steering shaft, 4 Power steering pump, 5 Rack and pinion power steering.
of superimposed steering 1 Valve, 2 Electromagnetic lock, 3 Worm, 4 Electric motor, 5 Rack, 6 Planetary gear, 7 Worm gear.
of teeth between the flex spline and the : circular spline. The races of the flexible ball bearing follow the shaft motion of the elliptical inner rotor and transmit this shaft motion to the flex spline. Here, too, there is always a mechanical link between the steering wheel and the steered wheels via the toothing of the harmonic drive.
In the passive state, the electric motor is blocked by an electromechanical lock, thereby ensuring direct mechanical through drive for the steering movement. Activation concept Activation concept The superimposed steering ECU checks the plausibility of the required sensor information and evaluates this information. It calculates the setpoint angle for the electric motor and generates via an integrated driver stage the pulse width modulated signals for activating the electric motor. This is implemented as a brushless DC motor with integrated rotor position sensor. The maximum motor current is 40 A at a vehicle system voltage of 12 V. The rotor position sensor enables the control unit to control the electronic commutation and thus the direction of rotation of the motor. It also calculates and checks the total set additional steering angle using a summation algorithm in the control unit software. The effective steering angle, the sum total of the steering wheel angle and the superimposed angle of the electric motor, is calculated by the ECU, and made available on the vehicle communication bus to the partner ECUs.
Setpoint value The setpoint value for the effective steering angle formed in the superimposed steering ECU is made up of the partial setpoint value for steering comfort and the partial setpoint value for vehicle stabilization. The signals required to calculate these variables are read in by the control unit via the CAN bus.
The partial setpoint value for the steering comfort is implemented as a speed dependent, variable steering ratio. The value is calculated from the input variables of steering angle and driving speed. When the vehicle is stationary and at low driving speeds, an angle is added to the steering angle set by the driver. This makes the steering ratio more direct. The driver can turn the wheels fully with less than one complete steering wheel revolution. This steering angle addition is continuously reduced as driving speed increases. From speeds of roughly 80 90 km/h, a proportion is subtracted from the driver's steering angle and steering becomes more indirect. This ensures straight running vehicle stability at high speeds and at the same time prevents the driver from losing control of the vehicle due to excessively fast steering movements.
steering with harmonic drive 1 Input shaft, 2 Output shaft, 3 Electric motor, 4 Rotor position sensor, 5 Elliptical inner rotor , 7 Flex spline, 8 Flexible ball bearing.
Safety concept Safety concept All of the internal and external signals that are used are continuously monitored in the control unit and their plausibility checked. If a sensor signal is no longer plausible, the additional steering function on which it is based is first disabled. For example, if the yaw rate sensor that measures the rotation of the vehicle around its vertical axis fails, the yawrate control of the superimposed steering system is disabled. The variable steering ratio remains active.
If safe activation of the electric motor is no longer possible due to a fault, the system is completely shut down and direct steering wheel through drive is ensured by self locking of the gear stage and by an electromechanical lock. This fallback level is always automatically active when the internal combustion engine is not running or even if there is no electrical supply voltage.
Power assisted steering systems for commercial vehicles Power assisted steering  with all hydraulic transmission Hydrostatic steering systems are hydraulic power assisted steering systems. The steering force of the driver is hydraulically boosted and transmitted exclusively by hydraulic means to the steered wheels. Because there is no mechanical connection, the maximum permissible speed is limited by national regulations. In Germany, this is 25 km/h. Depending on the system configuration and emergency steering properties, approval up to a speed of 62 km/h is possible. Use of these systems is therefore confined to machinery and special vehicles.
the ball and nut. Short toothing on the : ball and nut meshes with the toothing on the segment shaft. The generated rotary movement of the segment shaft is transmitted via a steering arm to the steering linkage and the steered wheels.
The servo force is applied, as with rack and pinion power steering, by a rotary slide valve. The working cylinder is formed by a sealing surface between the ball and nut housing and the steering box. Because no additional lines are required outside the housing, a robust and compact steering box with high power output is created.
Dual circuit power assisted steering system for heavy duty commercial vehicles Dual circuit steering systems . If a circuit fails, caused for example by a fault in the steering system or engine failure, the vehicle can be steered with the still operational redundant circuit in accordance with the statutory requirements.
Dual circuit systems take the form of ball and nut power steering with an integrated second steering valve. This second valve controls an additionally externally installed working cylinder and thereby provides the redundancy in relation to the existing servo system in the ball and nut steering.
steering 1 Steering pump 1, 2 Steering pump 2, 3 Oil reservoir 1, 4 Oil reservoir 2, 5 Working cylinder, 6 Left cylinder chamber, 7 Right cylinder chamber, 8 Dual circuit steering valve.
Definitions and principles: . Brake equipment All the vehicle brake systems whose functions are to reduce vehicle speed or bring the vehicle to a halt, or to hold the vehicle stationary if already halted.
Brake systems Service brake system All the elements, the action of which may be regulated, allowing the driver to reduce, directly or indirectly, the speed of a vehicle during normal driving or to bring the vehicle to a halt.
Secondary brake system All the elements, the action of which may be regulated, allowing the driver to reduce, directly or indirectly, the speed of a vehicle or to bring the vehicle to a halt in case of failure of the service brake system.
Parking brake system All the elements allowing the vehicle to be held stationary mechanically even on an inclined surface, and particularly in the absence of the driver.
Continuous operation brake system System of components which allows the driver to reduce the vehicle's speed or descend a long downhill gradient at a virtually constant speed with practically no wear to the friction brakes. A continuousoperation brake system may incorporate one or more retarders.
Automatic brake system All the elements which automatically brake the trailer as a result of intended or accidental separation from the tractor vehicle. Electronic brake system Brake system controlled by an electrical signal generated and processed by the control transmission system. An electrical output signal controls components which generate the application force.
Component parts Energy supplying device Parts of a brake system which supply, regulate and, if necessary, condition the energy required for braking. It terminates at the point where the transmission device starts, where the various circuits of the brake systems, including the circuits of accessories if fitted, are isolated either from the energy supplying device or from each other.
The energy source is that part of an energy supplying device which generates the energy. It may be located remotely from the vehicle or may be the muscular force of the driver.
The control device is defined as ending at the point at which the braking energy is distributed, or where part of the energy is diverted to control braking energy.
Transmission device: Parts of a brake system which transmit the energy distributed by the control device. It starts either at the point where the control device terminates or at the point where the energy supplying device terminates. It terminates at those parts of the brake system in which the forces opposing the vehicle's movement, or its tendency towards movement, are generated. It can, for example, be mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic .
Brake Parts of a brake system in which the forces opposing the vehicle's movement, or its tendency towards movement, are developed, such as friction brakes .
Brake system types relating to the energy supplying device Muscular energy brake system Brake system in which the energy necessary to produce the braking force is supplied solely by the physical effort of the driver.
Energy assisted brake system Brake system in which the energy necessary to produce the braking force is supplied by the physical effort of the driver and one or more energy supplying devices.
Non muscular energy brake system Brake system in which the energy necessary to produce the braking force is supplied by one or more energy supplying devices excluding the physical effort of the driver. This is used only to control the system.
Note: A brake system in which the driver can increase the braking force, in a state of totally failed energy, by muscular effort acting on the system, is not included in the above definition.
Inertia brake system Brake system in which the energy necessary to produce the braking force arises from the approach of the trailer to its tractor vehicle.
Gravity brake system Brake system in which the energy necessary to produce the braking force is supplied by the lowering of a component part of the trailer due to gravity.
Definitions of brake systems  relating to the arrangement of  the transmission device Single circuit brake system Brake system having a transmission device embodying a single circuit. The transmission device comprises a single circuit if, in the event of a failure in the transmission device, no energy for the production of the application force can be transmitted by this transmission device.
Multi circuit brake system Brake system having a transmission device embodying several circuits. The transmission device comprises several circuits if, in the event of a failure in the transmission device, energy for the production of the application force can still be transmitted, wholly or partly, by this transmission device.
Definitions of brake systems relating : to vehicle combinations Single line brake system Assembly in which the brake systems of the individual vehicles act in such a way that the single line is used both for the energy supply to, and for the control of, the brake system of the trailer.
Dualor multi line brake systems Assembly in which the brake systems of the individual vehicles act in such a way that several lines are used separately and simultaneously for the energy supply to, and for the control of, the brake system of the trailer.
operate a directly operated control device on the tractor vehicle and an indirectly operated control device on the trailer by a single operation and with a variable degree of force.
of the vehicles forming the combination is supplied by the same energy source .
gradually operate a directly operated control device on the tractor vehicle and an indirectly operated control device on the trailer by a single operation.
of the vehicles forming the road train is supplied by at least two different energy sources .
ing of the individual units of a road train. Non continuous brake system Combinations of the brake systems of the vehicles forming a road train which is neither continuous nor semi continuous.
Lines connecting the brake equipment of vehicles in a road train Supply line: A supply line is a special feed line transmitting energy from the tractor vehicle to the energy accumulator of the trailer.
Brake line: A control line is a special control line by which the energy essential for control is transmitted from the tractor vehicle to the trailer.
Common brake and supply line: Line serving equally as brake line and as supply line . Secondary brake line: Special actuating line transmitting the energy from the tractor vehicle to the trailer essential for secondary braking of the trailer.
Braking mechanics Mechanical phenomena occurring between the start of actuation of the control device and the end of the braking action. Gradual braking Braking which, within the normal range of operation of the control device, permits the driver, at any moment, to increase or reduce, to a sufficiently fine degree, the braking force by operating the control device. When an increase in braking force is obtained by the increased action of the control device, an inverse action must lead to a reduction in that force.
Application force Fs: On friction brakes, the total force applied to a brake lining and which causes the braking force by the effect of friction.
Braking torque: Product of frictional forces resulting from the application force and the distance between the points of application of these forces and the axis of rotation of the wheels.
Total braking force Ff: Sum of the braking forces at the tire contact patches of all the wheels and the ground, produced by the effect of the brake system, and which oppose the movement or the tendency of the vehicle to move.
Braking force distribution: Specification of braking force according to axle, given in % of the total braking force Ff. Example: front axle 60 %, rear axle 40 %.
Time periods Reaction time .
Actuating time of the control device: Elapsed time between the moment when the component of the control device . Initial response time t1 t0: Elapsed time between the moment when the component of the control device on which the control force acts starts to move and the moment when the braking force takes effect.
Pressure build up time t19 t1: Period that elapses between the point at which the braking force starts to take effect and the point at which a certain level is reached .
Initial response and pressure build up time: The sum of the initial response and pressure build up times is used to assess how the brake system behaves over time until the moment at which full braking effect is reached.
Release time: Elapsed time between the moment when the control device starts to release and the moment when the braking force ceases.
Total braking time t4 t0: Elapsed time between the moment when the control device on which the control force acts starts to move and the moment when the braking force ceases. If the vehicle stops before the braking force ceases, the time when motion ceases is the end of the active braking time.
Braking distance s Distance traveled by the vehicle during the total braking time. If the time when motion ceases constitutes the end of the total braking time, this distance is called the "stopping distance".
2  E u 2  B  _________ 2    where uB and uE are the vehicle speeds up to the points sB and sE.
The values stipulated in SS 41 StVZO with regard to mean fully developed deceleration do not apply, for example, to the recurring inspections required in Germany for registered vehicles on the road . In these inspections, the requirements of SS 29 StVZO , s. 1, Annex VIII in conjunction with Annex VIIIa, Guideline for performing the general inspection and Guideline for performing the safety inspection, apply.
The requirements in SS 41 StVZO and ECE R13H with regard to brake equipment are essentially identical. However, ECE Regulations R13, R13H and R78 have been further updated and also contain, for example, regulations covering electronically controlled brake systems. The prescribed braking effects must be determined in accordance with Directive 71/320/EEC, s. 1.1.2, Annex II, amended by Directive 98/12/EC , or in accordance with SS 41 StVZO, s. 12.
Requirements placed  on brake systems  Category M and N vehicles must comply with the provisions which pertain to the service, secondary and parking brake systems. The brake systems may have common components. Such vehicles must have at least two mutually independent control devices for the brake systems, one of which must be lockable. The control devices must be fitted with separate transmission devices, each must be able to continue operating when the other fails. The distribution of braking force between the individual axles is prescribed and must be sensible. If a malfunction occurs, it must be possible to achieve the prescribed secondary braking effect with the remaining operational part of the brake system or with the vehicle's other brake system without the vehicle departing from its lane.
The implementation of this regulation for : the vehicle categories, except categories M1 and N1, is defined in Regulation EC 661/2009 , Annex V.
Continuous operation brake systems Continuous operation brake systems are additionally used to relieve the strain on the service brake on long downhill gradients. Category M3 vehicles for local and long distance duty must be equipped with a retarder. Exhaust brakes or similar facilities are classed as retarders. The retarder must be designed to hold the vehicle when fully laden when driving on a downhill gradient of 7 % and a distance of 6 km at a speed of 30 km/h.
Category O trailers Category O1 trailers are not required to have their own brake system; a securing connection to the tractor vehicle is sufficient. Category O2 trailers and above must be fitted with service and parking brake systems, which may have common components. The distribution of braking force between the individual axles is prescribed in Directive 71/320/EEC. It must be sensibly distributed between the axles.
Category O3 trailers and above , must be equipped with an antilock braking facility. Semitrailers only need to be equipped with ABS if the gross weight rating reduced by the fifth wheel load exceeds 3.5 t.
Category O3 trailers .
Category O2 trailers and below must be equipped with inertia brake systems. The trailer must brake automatically if it becomes decoupled from the tractor vehicle while moving, or it must be equipped with a securing connection to the tractor vehicle. Category L vehicles Motorized twoand three wheeled vehicles must be equipped with 2 mutually independent brake systems. In the case of duty category L5 three wheel vehicles, the two brake systems must both act on all the wheels. A parking brake system must be fitted.
Tractor vehicles and trailers with compressed air brake systems The compressed air connections between the individual vehicles must be of the dualor multi line design. This ensures that the compressed air brake system in the trailer can also be refilled during the braking operation. When the service brake system on the tractor unit is operated, the service brake system on the trailer must also be operated with a variable degree of force. If a fault occurs in the service brake system of the tractor unit, that part of the system not affected by the fault must be capable of braking the trailer with a variable degree of force. If one of the connecting lines between tractor unit and trailer is interrupted or develops a leak, it must still be possible to brake the trailer, or it must brake automatically.
The energy accumulators of the service brake systems must be designed such that, after eight full operations of the service brake, at least the requested secondary braking effect is furnished on the ninth braking. The energy accumulators must not be replenished during this test. The braking effect of the individual vehicles is prescribed as a function of the pressure at the "Brake" coupling head in Directive 71/320/EEC.
Vehicles with antilock  braking facilities Antilock braking facilities must comply with Directives 71/320/EEC, Annex X and ECE R13, Annex 13. An antilock braking facility is part of a service brake system which automatically controls the slip in the direction of wheel rotation at one or more
of the vehicle's wheels during the braking : operation. The requirements placed on the antilock braking facility differ, depending on the category, for vehicles ABS categories 1, 2 and 3, for trailers ABS categories A and B.
ity must be maintained. Under a u split condition , steering corrections of 120deg during the first two seconds and 240deg in total are permissible.
and N1) with ABS which are equipped to tow a trailer with ABS must be fitted with a separate visual warning system  for the trailer. Transfer must be effected via pin 5 of the electrical plug in connection as per ISO 7638 .
then four uncontrolled full braking operations without energy replenishment. Requirements and test conditions The required values and test conditions must be applied during the test in accordance with SS 19 . Departures from the test method described in Directive 71/320/EEC, Annex II, s. 1.1.2, last amended by Directive 98/12/EC and the test method specified in SS 41 StVZO, s. 12, are permitted especially during verification checks as per SS 29 StVZO if the condition and the effect can be ascertained by other means . When vehicles to be newly registered are tested, a higher braking deceleration corresponding to the usual easing of the braking effect must be achieved; furthermore, sufficient state ofthe art continuous brake duty must be guaranteed for longer stretches of downhill driving.
Minimum retardation and  max. permissible control forces during the general inspection  as per SS 29 StVZO The required retardation values are determined on test benches and only in exceptional cases in road tests. The required values are maximum values, because the time response which is needed to determine the mean fully developed deceleration is not measured in these recurring inspections.
Structure and organization : of brake systems Essential requirements The brake systems in motor vehicles must comply with the requirements of Directive 71/320/EEC, ECE R13 Part 1, ECE R13 Part 2 and ECE R13 H, and other country specific regulations. Motor vehicles must be equipped with two separate brake systems, one of which must be lockable. The brake systems must have separate control devices. In the event of a fault in the service brake system, it must still be possible for at least two wheels to be braked.
Types of brake system The brake systems comprise the service brake and parking brake systems and brake system. The requested secondary brake system normally comes into play when a fault occurs in the service brake system. Special purpose vehicles with special requirements may also have special braking functions such as a hill climbing brake or an anti jackknifing brake.
Type of force generation When it comes to how the force is generated, there are three different types of system: muscular energy, energy assisted, and non muscular energy brake systems. In muscular energy systems, the muscular force of the driver alone is effective, in energy assisted systems this is boosted by booster systems , and in non muscular energy systems, the driver's control force acts only as a control variable. The maximum required control forces are prescribed for each type of vehicle.
Transmission device Force is transmitted from the control device to the wheel brakes by mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or electric means. Mechanical force transmission is only customary and prescribed for parking brake systems .
Force transmission for the service brake system is performed via two separate brake circuits by hydraulic or pneumatic means so that at least one brake circuit remains in operation in the event of a fault. Electrical brake operation has up to now only been used in electrically acting parking brake systems .
Brake circuit configuration Configuration of the brake circuits is governed by DIN 74000 . In category M1 vehicles . Here the front axle forms one of the brake circuits and the rear axle forms the other. All other brake circuit configurations as per DIN 74000 are rarely used today and are therefore no longer described in these pages. The direct demand for a dual circuit design of the transmission device is prescribed in SS 41 StVZO, s. 16 only for motor buses.
Braking force distribution: Directives 71/320/EEC, ECE R13 and ECE R13H also place requirements on braking force distribution between the individual axles. This must be sensibly distributed in all load states between the axles. Braking force distribution can be effected on the one hand through an assembly related configuration of the wheel brakes and on the other hand through a vehiclerelated configuration. Among other things, the center of gravity height, the wheelbase and the empty empty ratio of the vehicle are taken into consideration. In commercial vehicles, according to the diagrams in Directive 71/320/EEC, braking force distribution is also dependent on the pressure at the "Brake" coupling head. Vehicle related configuration of brakingforce distribution is effected by the integration of a braking force limiter or an automatically acting braking force metering device .
In modern vehicles braking force distribution is integrated as an additional function into the electronic wheel slip control system .
Assemblies Brake systems in motor vehicles consist of the following assemblies, which differ in design depending on whether the system is hydraulic or pneumatic: energy supply, control devices, transmission devices, control facilities, wheel brakes, and auxiliary devices.
 EC Directive 71/320/EEC: Council Directive of 26 July 1971 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the braking devices of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers.
 EC Directive 98/12/EC of the Commission of 27 January 1998 adapting to technical progress Council Directive 71/320/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the braking devices of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers.
 Regulation No. 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning type approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles, their trailers and systems, components and separate technical units intended therefore.
 Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units for such vehicles .
Subdivision of passenger car : brake systems Brake systems for passenger cars and light utility vehicles must comply with the requirements of various directives and statutory provisions, e.g., 71/320/EEC . The requirements with regard to functioning, effect and test methods are set out in these regulations. The entire system is subdivided into the service brake system, the parking brake system and the secondary brake system. Service brake system The service brake system allows the driver to reduce with graduable effect the speed of a vehicle during normal driving or to bring the vehicle to a halt. In passenger cars and light utility vehicles it is normally designed as an energy assisted brake system.
1 Wheel speed sensors, 2 Wheel brakes , 6 Warning lamp for antilock braking system and driving dynamics control. SFB0803Y 3 5 6 2 2 4 2 2 1 1 1 1
serviceand parking brake systems are : thus equipped with separate, individual control and transmission devices. The parking brake system may be graduable in design, acting on the wheels of only one axle.
The holding stationary effect is calculated according to ECE R13 H on a downhill gradient with fully laden vehicles. The downhill gradient for single vehicles is 20 %. If the vehicle is equipped to tow a trailer, the holding stationary effect must also be achieved with an unbraked trailer on a downhill gradient of 12 %.
Secondary brake system In the event of a fault, e.g., leak or fractured pipe, it must still be possible with the operational part of the brake system to achieve at least the secondary braking effect with the identical control force at the control device. It must be possible to meter the secondary braking effect, which in turn must be at least 50 % . The vehicle must not leave its lane when the secondary brake is applied.
Vacuum brake booster Function Function The brake booster reduces the applied control force required for the braking operation, but must not impair the sensitive graduation of the braking force and the feeling of the measure of braking.
1 Push rod,  2 Vacuum chamber with   vacuum connection,  3 Diaphragm, 4 Power piston, 5 Valve unit, 6 Air filter, 7 Piston rod, 8 Working chamber,  9 Reaction element.
diesel engines and on electric vehicles : or hybrid vehicles to amplify the force applied by the driver's foot. A diaphragm separates the vacuum chamber with vacuum connection from the working chamber . The piston rod transmits the applied foot pressure to the working piston and the amplified force is passed to the brake master cylinder via the push rod.
Operating principle Operating principle If the brake is not operated, the vacuum chamber and working chamber are connected via the valve unit. Given that the vacuum connection is connected to a vacuum source, this means that there is a vacuum in both chambers.
As soon as a braking operation is initiated, the piston rod moves forwards in the direction of the arrow. After a short stroke the connection between the working chamber and the vacuum chamber is blocked. As the piston rod continues to move, the inlet valve in the valve unit is opened and atmospheric air flows into the working chamber. The pressure in the working chamber is then greater than in the vacuum chamber. The atmospheric pressure acts via the diaphragm on the diaphragm disk with which it is in contact. Because the diaphragm disk is attached to the valve unit, the latter moves when the disk moves, thereby assisting the foot pressure transmitted by the connecting rod. Maximum boost is dependent on the effective diaphragm or piston area, on the atmospheric pressure and on the effective vacuum.
When the braking operation has ended, the inlet valve is closed and the vacuum and working chambers are connected via the valve unit. In this way, the pressure  so that the vacuum inside the brake booster is retained. Thus, brake boost is effective even when the engine is switched off for several brake actuations.
Electromechanical brake booster The electromechanical brake booster referred to as iBooster by Bosch satisfies, thanks to its electronic control, new demands imposed on brake systems. These demands include for example lower or no availability of vacuum in the vehicle, reduced CO2 emissions, and redundancy for highly automated driving. The iBooster can be used with all drive concepts, including hybrid and electric vehicles. Like the vacuum brake booster, the iBooster supports the driver with an assisting force .
Operating principle Operating principle The iBooster . Certain parameters can, in contrast to the vacuum brake booster, be additionally influenced by the software logic.
quirements specified by the vehicle manufacturer. Jump in is the point at which the driver force proportionally influences the brake booster braking force. Below the
jump in the braking force comes solely : from the booster itself. The driver must first overcome spring forces before his/her initiated force influences the braking force. In vehicles with an electric or hybrid drive the iBooster, in combination with a special type of driving dynamics control , enables brake energy to be recuperated to a vehicle deceleration of 0.3 g without affecting the braking feel. Here during braking the decelerations caused by wheel brake and electric machine are variably matched to each other without additional components. In hybrid vehicles this regenerative braking reduces fuel consumption and CO2 emissions especially in the event of frequent braking and accelerating in urban traffic.
The iBooster can build up brake pressure automatically with the aid of the engine/ transmission unit. Compared with typical driving dynamics control systems, the required brake pressure is built up faster and adjusted with greater accuracy. This is beneficial for example for automatic emergency braking systems and ACC functions.
In combination with driving dynamics control the iBooster offers the brake system redundancy required for automated driving. Both systems are, independently of one another, able to generate brake pressure and decelerate the vehicle.
Brake master cylinder The brake master cylinder converts the foot force applied by the driver and boosted by the brake booster into hydraulic brake pressure.
characteristic 1 Jump in, 2 Pedal characteristic resulting from design, 3 Adaptation of pedal characteristic by software .
equipped with two separate service brake : circuits. If a leak occurs .
Operating principle The force applied at the brake pedal and boosted by the brake booster acts directly on the push rod piston and pushes it to the left. After short piston travel the compensating port is sealed and a pressure build up can take place in the push rod circuit. This also causes the intermediate piston to be pushed to the left.
1 Cylinder housing, 2 Pressure chamber, intermediate piston circuit,  3 Pressure chamber, push rod circuit, 4 Pressure port, intermediate piston circuit,  5 Pressure port, push rod circuit, 6 Connection for brake fluid reservoir, 7 Compensating port,  8 Replenishing port, 9 Intermediate piston, 10 Space, 11 Captive piston spring,  12 Plastic bush, 13 Push rod piston,  14 Compression spring,  intermediate piston circuit, 15 Primary cup seal,  intermediate piston, 16 Separating cup seal, 17 Stop sleeve, 18 Stop screw, 19 Support ring, 20 Primary cup seal,  push rod piston, 21 Stop disk, 22 Secondary cup seal, 23 Snap ring.
1 Cylinder housing, 2 Pressure chamber, intermediate piston circuit,  3 Pressure chamber, push rod circuit, 4 Pressure port, intermediate piston circuit,  5 Pressure port, push rod circuit, 6 Connection for brake fluid reservoir, 7 Push rod, 8 Intermediate piston, 9 Central valve, 10 Stop for central valve, 11 Primary cup seal,    intermediate piston, 12 Primary cup seal,    push rod piston, 13 Separating cup seal, 14 Compensating port, 15 Compression spring,  intermediate piston circuit, 16 Compression spring,  push rod circuit.
mediate piston and the latter from over : running the compensating port with the primary cup seal. In this situation pressure compensation via the compensating port would no longer be possible in the secondary circuit, and in the event of a residual pressure the brake shoes would not lift off the brake drums when the brake releases.
Operating principle When the brake is actuated, the push rod piston and the intermediate piston move in the direction of the arrow to the left, overrun the compensating ports and force brake fluid through the pressure ports into the brake circuits. As pressure increases the intermediate piston is no longer moved by the captive piston spring, but instead by the pressure of the brake fluid. Expansion reservoir The expansion reservoir, also called the brake fluid reservoir, is mounted directly on the brake master cylinder and connected to it via two ports. It is both the reservoir for the brake fluid and the expansion reservoir. It compensates volume fluctuations in the brake circuits which occur after the brake is released, in response to wear of the brake linings and to temperature differences in the brake system, and during intervention by the antilock braking system .
Transmission device The hydraulic pressure is transmitted by the brake fluid via brake pipes as per DIN 74234 .
Wheel brakes Floating caliper disk brakes are usually used on the front wheels, but fixed caliper disk brakes may also be used. Both floating caliper disk brakes with integrated locking mechanism and Simplex drum brakes are used on the rear wheels  can also be used on the rear wheels. In this case, the drum brake accommodated in the brake disk chamber is used exclusively for the parking brake system.
The parking brake control device can be mechanically designed as a handbrake lever or a footbrake pedal with locking mechanism. Force is generally transmitted via cables or linkage to the wheel brakes on the rear axle. In the case of electromechanical parking brakes, the brake is actuated by means of electric motors and gearings .
Hydraulic modulator Arranged between the brake master cylinder and the wheel brakes is the hydraulic modulator of the antilock braking system or the driving dynamics control system and, depending on the scope of functions, a braking force regulator or a braking force limiter. These components, by limiting and adapting the brake pressure mostly on the rear axle, ensure a sensible distribution of braking force between the front and rear axles. This function can, especially in vehicles with markedly different load states, be executed on a load sensitive basis .
The hydraulic modulator modifies the brake pressure during the braking process in such a way that the wheels are prevented from locking. Depending on the control variation, this job is performed by several solenoid valves and an electrically driven supply pump. In passenger car brake systems, the front axle is individually controlled, i.e., each wheel is braked according to the respective grip. The rear wheels are controlled according to the select low principle so that both rear wheels are braked together according to the wheel which has the lower grip .
Electromechanical parking brake: System overview System overview Conventional parking brake systems are muscular energy brake systems and are operated by purely mechanical means via lockable hand levers or foot pedals or via a crankgear. In electromechanical parking brake systems, also referred to simply as electromechanical parking brakes or automatic parking brakes, the control force is generated by an electric drive.
Operation and control are effected electrically via a switch or via logic control commands by other ECUs, which enable automatic closing or opening of the parking brake. The electromechanical parking brake can only be operated when the vehicle is stationary or at low speeds . This must also be possible when the ignition and starting switch is turned off. If electric parking brake systems are operated at higher speeds, an emergency braking operation is first executed by the driving dynamics control system. The parking brake is closed when the stationary vehicle status is attained within this braking operation.
The application force in the parking mechanism . The retensioning of the brake necessitated by the cooling of the mechanical brake components is performed preventatively or according to a calculated temperature model and after vehicle movement has been detected.
A safety concept must ensure that unintentional activation in both the release and the closing directions due to electrical faults is ruled out. Furthermore, intentional activation of the electromechanical parking brake .
with an emergency release device. It must : also be possible for the system to be activated even when the ignition and starting switch is turned off, and the system may only be released when the ignition and starting switch is turned on and the brake pedal is simultaneously being pressed .
The driver is always alerted to a locked parking brake system by a red warning lamp. Self diagnosis detects malfunctions and faults, and indicates them via a warning lamp. A text message can also appear in a driver information display. The fault memory can be read out with a diagnostic tester and cleared after the fault has been corrected.
Electromechanical parking brake with Electromechanical parking brake with servomotor on the brake caliper  servomotor on the brake caliper  The electromechanical parking brake with servomotor comprises the following components , floating caliper with electric motor and multiple stage gearing. A system distribution as described in VDA Recommendation 305 100 is becoming increasingly common. This entails integrating the functionality of the parking brake in the driving dynamics control system, thereby affording freedom in the choice of different manufacturers of these systems and the parking brake.
In the case of a brake caliper with an electric servomotor, force is transmitted for the parking brake effect via a multiple stage gearing and a threaded spindle. It is activated by way of an electrical switch , activates the electric servomotors via separate driver stages and electrical connecting leads.
A very high gear ratio means that very high application forces can be generated. These are in the region of 15 to 25 kN. As dictated by the concept, the electromechanical and hydraulic forces can be superimposed .
Electromechanical parking brake  Electromechanical parking brake  with cables with cables In the case of an electromechanical parking brake with cables, the following components are combined in a centrally arranged assembly above the rear axle, in the passenger compartment or in the fender .
This system too is activated by way of an electrical switch, which forwards the control commands to an ECU. The ECU activates the electric servomotor via a driver stage. The application force can vary, depending on the road gradient. The system is automatically retensioned when the vehicle is stopped either after a cooling phase corresponding to a temperature model or after vehicle movement has been detected.
Electrohydraulic brake: Function The electrohydraulic brake is an electronic brake control system with hydraulic actuator engineering. Like a conventional hydraulic brake, its function is to reduce vehicle speed, bring the vehicle to a halt, or keep the vehicle stationary. As an active braking system, it takes control of brake operation, braking force boosting and braking force control. Hydraulic standard wheel brakes are used as brakes.
sists of two separate angle position sensors. Together with the brake pressure sensor for the pressure applied by the driver, this produces a threefold system for detecting driver input. The system can continue to function normally, even if one of the sensors fails.
The pedal travel simulator produces an appropriate force/travel curve and calculates the amount of brake pedal damping. The driver experiences the same "brake feel" with electrohydraulic brakes as with a very well designed conventional braking system.
A conventional brake booster is not required here. Only the driver's brake request is determined in the actuation unit during normal operation; the brake pressure is generated in the hydraulic modulator. The brake master cylinder performs its function in the event of a system failure. The expansion reservoir supplies the hydraulic modulator with brake fluid.
Electronic control The brake request is determined in the remote mounted ECU from the sensor signals of the actuation unit. Braking characteristics can be adapted to the driving conditions . A "duller" pedal characteristic can be used to alert the driver to a reduction in braking effect, when the brakes reach the limits of their effectiveness before overheating induces brake fading.
Thanks to complete electronic pressure control, the electrohydraulic brake can be easily networked with vehicle guidance systems .
components as a block diagram. An electric motor drives a hydraulic pump. This charges a high pressure accumulator to a pressure of between approximately 90 and 130 bar, monitored by an accumulator pressure sensor. The four separate wheel pressure modulators are supplied by the accumulator and set the required pressure at the wheel brake cylinders separately for each wheel. The pressure modulators themselves each consist of two valves with proportional control characteristics and a pressure sensor. Brake pressure modulation and active braking are silent and generate no brakepedal feedback.
In normal mode, the isolating valves isolate the brakes from the actuation unit. The system is in "brake by wire" mode. It electronically detects the driver's braking request and transmits it "by wire" to the wheel pressure modulators. The interaction of electric motor, valves, and pressure sensors is regulated by the ECU. This has two microcontrollers which monitor each another. The essential feature of these electronics is their extensive self diagnosis, which monitors the plausibility of every system state at all times. It means that any faults can be displayed to the driver before a critical condition arises. If components fail, the system automatically provides the optimal remaining partial function to the driver.
Braking in the event of system failure Braking in the event of system failure The electrohydraulic brake is designed so that in the event of serious faults .
Control, electronic stability program). Further classic brake system components such as vacuum source or vacuum pump, long hydraulic lines from the brake master cylinder to the hydraulic unit of the brake control system, and electrical connections are rendered superfluous. The installation requirement in the vehicle is reduced as a result.
power brake , 8 Brake fluid reservoir.
SFB0812 1E SFB0813Y Vehicle network Brakes Energy supply Actuation and modulation Communication 2 1 3 4 5 B C A 2 3 1 5 6 8 4 7
The integrated power brake is able : to build up the necessary brake pressure for driver assistance functions on the one hand very quietly and comfortably and on the other hand with high dynamic response.
The smaller number of brake system components simplifies the production of vehicles for the vehicle manufacturer and also reduces the complexity of the value added chain.
Functional description Determination of the driver's braking Determination of the driver's braking request request The integrated power brake . The driver's braking request is determined by an integrated pedal travel sensor.
By wire mode By wire mode The "by wire mode" is activated as soon as the unit detects that the driver wishes to brake precisely and in accordance with the driver's braking request. It forces brake fluid from the hydraulic module's working chamber into the wheel brakes and as a result the brake pressure requested by the driver is generated at the wheels.
HZ Brake master cylinder, PFS Pedal feel simulator, HM Hydraulic module, BMV Brake pressure modulation valves, CSV Brake circuit separation valve, PSV Hydraulic module plunger separation valve, SSV Simulator separation valve.
of integrated power brake 1 Input rod, 2 Pedal travel sensor, 3 Primary piston, 4 Secondary piston, 5 Seals, 6 Hydraulic module with electric motor  and plunger.
1 2 3 4 5 6 SFB0815Y SSV PSV a Brake pedal CSV HZ PFS IPB HM BMV Wheel 2 Wheel 3 Wheel 1 Wheel 4 Brake pedal SSV PSV HZ PFS IPB HM BMV b CSV Wheel 2 Wheel 3 Wheel 1 Wheel 4
Brake boosting: Brake boosting Brake boosting is simultaneously achieved by the pressure regulation of the hydraulic module. Because of the decoupling of the brake pedal and wheel brake pressure the brake pressure and the generator torque are masked in hybrid and electric vehicles. In other words, the braking effect of the wheel brakes can be reduced by the braking effect of the electric machine achieved by recuperation. The masking occurs continuously during recuperation and without any noticeable effects on the brake pedal. In the case of brake pressure requests not initiated by the driver, such as for example coming from an ACC system, pressure is generated at the wheels in the same way by means of the hydraulic module.
Wheel individual brake interventions Wheel individual brake interventions For wheel individual pressure generation or pressure modulation similarly to an ESC system . Because the brake fluid volume in the hydraulic module is limited by the design, the hydraulic module is recharged with brake fluid within a matter of a few milliseconds during a long ABS control operation. The brake pressure in the individual wheels is maintained during recharging and consequently there is no impact on the vehicle's braking effect.
Functional safety In the case of safety related vehicle components such as the braking system, safe operation and system behavior are of central importance. The electromechanical braking system . Redundancy Redundancy Sensing of the driver's braking requests is redundantly designed in the interests of reliability. For the brake master cylinder piston travel the mechanism is simple and the sensor system and electronics are present in redundant form. The piston travel is also checked for plausibility against the measure brake master cylinder pressure.
Fallback level Fallback level To ensure that the driver is able to slow down the vehicle reliably in the event of a fault, the integrated power brake  in contrast to conventional braking systems reduces the diameter of the brake master cylinder. In the mechanical fallback level a higher brake pressure and with it a greater deceleration of the vehicle are thus made possible with the same pedal force.
Monitoring for hydraulic changes Monitoring for hydraulic changes But, as a result of the smaller brake master cylinder diameter, the brake fluid volume in the brake master cylinder is also reduced compared with a conventional braking system. The state of the braking system is therefore continuously monitored for hydraulic changes . The driver is warned before a critical system state can ensue in the event of a fault.
Reliability of the electrical power supply Reliability of the electrical power supply The availability of brake boosting is directly allied with the supply of the integrated power brake with electrical power. It is therefore essential to ensure that the vehicle electrical system is sufficiently reliable.
Redundancy for automated driving: Second pressure build up unit Second pressure build up unit For automated driving vehicles where the driver is no longer responsible for control of the vehicle, the integrated power brake  fails, this independent unit ensures that the vehicle can be slowed down and brought to a stop.
Integrated redundancy Integrated redundancy Integrated redundancy in the IPB may also be considered as an alternative to a second, independent pressure build up unit. Full redundancy is however not possible for all the system components. Seals or transmission elements for converting the rotary motion of the engine into a translatory motion of the piston cannot be redundantly designed automatically.
Market development Market development An integrated power brake .
________________________________ References References 71/320/EEC: Council Directive of 26 July 1971 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the braking devices of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers.
 ECE R13 H: Regulation No. 13 H of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Uniform provisions concerning the approval of passenger cars with regard to braking.
 VDA Recommendation 305 100: Recommendation for integration of electric parking brakes control into the ESC system .
 U. Bauer, T. Maucher, M. Brand: Integrated Power Brake modular set extension for highly automated driving. 8th International Munich Chassis Symposium 2017 chassis.tech plus. Verlag Springer Vieweg, 2017.
System overview: Brake systems for commercial vehicles and trailers must satisfy the requirements of various regulations such as, for example, RREG 71/320 EEC and ECE R13 . Essential functions, effects and test methods are set out in these regulations. The entire system is subdivided into the service brake, parking brake, secondary brake systems, and continuous action brake systems.
Service brake system Service brake system, tractor vehicle Service brake system, tractor vehicle The service brake system, designed as an energy assisted brake system in commercial vehicles must have a dual circuit design. The secondary braking effect must achieve at least 50 % of the braking effect of the service brake system. It is therefore customary to split the system into two brake circuits already separate on the supply side, even though this configuration is only legally required in motor buses.
1 Air compressor, driven by engine, 2 Pressure regulator, 3 Four circuit protection valve, 4.1 Air reservoir V1 for circuit 1, 4.2 Air reservoir V2 for circuit 2, 4.3 Air reservoir V3 for circuit 3 ( 8 15 4.2 SFB0798 1Y
The trailer is continually supplied with a de : fined pressure via the supply line. This pressure must be between 6.5 and 8.0 bar on an intact tractor vehicle, irrespective of the tractor vehicle's operating pressure established by the manufacturer. The trailer must be exchangeable. The trailer's servicebrake system is controlled by a second line, the brake line. This line is also governed by the regulations pertaining to trailer exchangeability. Thus the pressure in the brake line must be 0 bar in driving mode, and 6.0 to 7.5 bar in fully braked mode. Service brake system, trailer Service brake system, trailer The trailer has an independent servicebrake system, which is only partly subject to the demand for a secondary braking effect. According to the requirements in RREG 71/320, the braking effects of the service brake systems in the tractor vehicle and in the trailer must be within closely set tolerances as a function of the control pressure in the brake line to the trailer, i. e. they must be approximately the same .
, 11 Test connection, 12 Line filter. 6 11 9 11 11 11 11 8 4 4 4 2 3 3 5 12 1 12 10 4 7 SFB0799Y SFB0802 2E 0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 bar Pressure Laden TR /PR, TM /PM Unladen 0.65 0.35 7.5 5.5 4.5 0.575
Tractor vehicles and trailers must be freely exchangeable. Compatibility conditions have therefore been defined in Annex 2 RREG 71/320 and ECE R13. Accordingly, the ratio between retardation and pressure at the "Brake" coupling head in the range depicted in Figure 3 must be in the range of 0.2 to 7.5 bar at the "Brake" coupling head. The diagram only applies to tractor vehicle and trailer. All other vehicles and vehicle combinations are covered by other diagrams.
Parking brake system The parking brake system is an independent brake system which must hold the vehicle stationary after it has been brought to a stop, even when the driver is not in the vehicle. The holding stationary effect is calculated on a downhill gradient with fully laden vehicles. The downhill gradient for Category M, N, O single vehicles .
The parking brake system in commercial vehicles and motor buses is usually designed as a spring loaded brake system. The springs in the spring type brake cylinders, when the wheel brakes are adjusted in accordance with the regulations, generate the same force as the pneumatic brake cylinders in the service brake system when the nominal pressure  acts on their nominal effective area. If certain malfunctions occur, e. g. brake circuit failure or energy source failure, the springloaded brakes may not brake automatically and must therefore be protected and designed accordingly.
Energy assisted parking brake systems operation if it has to be engaged to achieve the prescribed secondary braking effect.
In the trailer, the parking brake system frequently operates as a muscular energy brake system. If the trailer control system in the tractor vehicle is configured in such a way that the service brake in the trailer also responds when the parking brake is operated in the tractor vehicle , the parking brake valve must be provided with a test setting. This makes it possible to release the service brake in the trailer when the parking brake in the tractor vehicle is operated. This in turn makes it possible to check whether only the tractor vehicle braked with the parking brake system can hold the entire vehicle combination.
Secondary brake system There is no independent secondary brake system. It comes into effect if a malfunction, e. g. brake circuit failure or energysource failure, occurs in the service brake system. In this event, it must still be possible for at least two wheels to be braked.
system a) Single vehicle, 18 % downhill gradient. b) Tractor vehicle and trailer,  12 % downhill gradient;  only the tractor vehicle is braked.
The supply volume must be designed : such that, in the event of an energysource failure, after eight full operations of the service brake there is still enough pressure available to achieve the secondary braking effect on the ninth full operation. In the event of a failure of a brake circuit on the supply side, it is essential to ensure that, when the energy source is intact, the pressure in the intact brake circuits does not drop permanently below the nominal pressure. This is achieved by using special protective devices, e. g. a four circuit protection valve or an electronic unit.
Continuous operation brake system The wheel brakes used are not designed for continuous operation. Prolonged braking or, in extreme cases, in complete brake system failure.
A wear free brake system is referred to as a continuous operation  brake system. In Germany, they are required in accordance with StVZO SS 41 s. 15 for motor buses with a gross weight rating of more than 5.5 t and for other motor vehicles with a gross weight rating of more than 9 t. A retarder must hold a fully laden vehicle over a distance of 6 km and a downhill gradient of 7 % at a speed of 30 km/h.
The service brake must be designed accordingly for trailers. Operation of the retarder in the tractor vehicle must not cause the service brake in the trailer to be operated .
Components of  commercial vehicle  brake systems Air supply and air processing Air supply and processing comprises the energy source, pressure control, air processing, and compressed air distribution. Compressor Compressor A compressor is the source of energy.  It takes in air and compresses it to compressed air, the working medium for the brake systems and the ancillaries .
a) Induction, b) Compression and discharge, c) Compression into the additional clearance. 1 Cylinder head, 2 Intermediate plate  , 10 Additional clearance. 2 10 9 4 6 7 8 5 3 1 a b c SFB0795Y
To reduce losses in the idle mode is used; this activates a clearance and thus reduces compression work. This reduces fuel consumption.
During its return stroke, the piston draws in air after the inlet valve opens automatically due to vacuum. The inlet valve closes at the start of the piston's return stroke. In the fore stroke, the piston compresses the air. When a certain pressure is reached, the outlet valve opens and compressed air is supplied to the brake system.
Nowadays, compressors achieve a stroke displacement of up to 720 cm3, a pressure level of up to 12.5 bar, and a maximum speed of 3,000 rpm. Their features include high efficiency, low oil consumption, and a long service life.
Pressure regulator Pressure regulator The pressure regulator controls the compressed air supplied by the compressor in such a way that the operating pressure lies within the activation and cutoff pressure .
As long as the pressure in the compressed air reservoirs lies below the cutoff pressure, connections 1 and 2 are connected and compressed air passes the pressure regulator. Once the cutoff pressure is reached, the pressure regulator switches to idle mode. Here, the venting piston is activated and connection 1 is connected to the atmosphere . Air drier Air drier The air drier cleans the compressed air and dries it to prevent corrosion and freezing in the brake system during winter operation.
Basically, an air drier consists of a desiccant box and a housing. The housing incorporates the air passage, a bleeder valve, and a control element for granulate regeneration . The granulate is regenerated by activating a regenerationair tank.
When the bleeder valve is closed, compressed air from the compressor flows through the desiccant box and from there to the supply air reservoirs. At the same time, a regeneration air tank is filled with dry compressed air. As compressed air flows through the desiccant box, water is removed by means of condensation and adsorption.
The granulate in the desiccant box has a limited water absorption capacity and must therefore be regenerated at regular intervals. In the reverse process, dry compressed air from the regeneration air reservoir is reduced to atmospheric pressure via the regeneration throttle upstream of the air drier, flows back through the moist granulate from which it draws off the moisture, and flows as moist air via the open bleeder valve to the atmosphere.
Four circuit protection valve: Four circuit protection valve The four circuit protection valve distributes the compressed air to the various brake and ancillary circuits, isolates the circuits from one another, and ensures the water supply for the remaining circuits in the event of failure of a circuit pressure of the assigned pneumatic circuit.
integrated pressure regulator 1 Desiccant box, 2 Compression spring,  3 Desiccant, 4 Cup ,  5 Compression spring, 6 Pin,  7 Diaphragm, 8 Compression spring,  9 Heating element, 10 Bleeder valve, 11 Drain connection, 12 Throttle, 13 Non return valve, 14 Preliminary filter, 15 Secondary filter.
a) Filling a compressed air reservoir, b) Filling all compressed air reservoirs. 1 Housing, 2 Compression spring, 3 Diaphragm piston, 4 Valve seat, 5 Non return valve, 6 Fixed throttle.
I IV overflow valves Ports: 1 Energy input, 21 24 Energy output to circuits 1 4. 1 2 3 4 6 5 22 24 23 21 1 1 a 23 21 I II III IV 22 24 b I II III IV UFB0617 1Y
The ancillary circuits for this type of valve : are additionally protected by two nonreturn valves. These non return valves can be omitted from four circuit protection valves with central intake flow. These overflow valves may also be provided with variable flow restrictors. These enable an empty system to be filled with small quantities of air.
If a malfunction occurs for example in circuit 1 of the brake system. This ensures both a sufficient supply of compressed air for the intact servicebrake circuit and the secondary braking effect. The supply to the ancillaries such as, for example, trailer, parking brake system and pneumatic suspension is also maintained.
Electronic air processing unit Electronic air processing unit Nowadays, the pressure control, air processing, and compressed air distribution are combined in one electronic unit, the air processing unit. The electronic airprocessing unit is a functional agglomeration of the pressure regulator, air drier and multiplecircuit protection valve into one mechatronic device. In addition, the control system of the parking brake is integrated in part. In all, integrating many functions in a mechatronic unit offers significant benefits with regard to system expenditure, functionality, and energy saving.
Energy storage The energy required for the braking operation and for the function of the ancillaries is provided and stored in sufficient quantities in compressed air reservoirs approved for use in road vehicles. The volume must be designed such that, without subsequent delivery, after eight full brakings the secondary braking effect prescribed for this vehicle is still achieved at least by the ninth full braking.
Despite the use of an air drier, the compressed air reservoirs are equipped with manual or automatically acting drain devices. Compressed air reservoirs are subject to the requirements of SS 41a s. 8 , and must be approved for use and permanently identified.
Service brake valve Service brake valves . The reaction piston is forced downwards, first closing the outlet valve and then opening the inlet valve. Compressed air is admitted into brake circuit 1 and the pressure increases. The brake pressure acts in the upward direction against the reaction piston, forcing it against the compression springs as long as the partial braking range is not exceeded. The brake end position is reached, with an equilibrium of forces existing at the reaction piston. Circuit 2 is controlled by the brake pressure in circuit 1. This acts, instead of the control device from above, on the reaction piston of circuit 2. At approximately the same time, the brake end position is reached in circuit 2 as well. In the fullbraking position or in the event of a failure of circuit 1, both reaction pistons are mechanically moved to their full extent by means of the control device. The outlet valves are closed, and the inlet valves remain open. Circuits 1 and 2 are pneumatically fully and safely isolated from each other.
Special designs facilitate different controlled brake pressures for circuits 1 and 2. These are required if a dual circuit booster cylinder is actuated by the service brake valve, or if circuit 2 is subject to load sensitive control. This is made possible by installing an appropriate spring assembly or a reaction piston with several effective areas.
1 Push rod, 2 and 3 Compression springs,  4 Reaction piston, 5 and 9 Inlet valve seat,  6 and 8 Outlet valve seat,  7 and 10 Valve plates, 11 Valve springs, 12 Return spring, 13 Control plunger, 14 Spring seat, 15 Connecting rod.
Parking brake valve : Parking brake valves application when the effect of the parking brake is required to achieve the secondary braking effect. Parkingbrake valves must be provided with a test setting when the service brake system is activated in the trailer on actuation of the parking brake.
Different variants of parking brake valve exist, depending on their application: non graduated, graduated or graduated with steep droop characteristic curve. The latter variant provides for a highly sensitive graduable effect, because the operating range of spring type brake cylinders, considered over the lever angle of the parking brake valve of approximately 80deg, is optimally used. The operating range of spring type brake cylinders is between approximately 5 bar .
 1 Actuating lever, 2 Detent element, 3 Eccentric element, 4 Return spring, 5 Outlet valve seat, 6 Inlet valve seat, 7 Valve plate, 8 Reaction piston, 9 Reaction spring, 10 Compression spring. Ports: 1 Energy input, circuit 3, 2 Control pressure to parking brake, 3 Vent.
Parking brake valves can have a dualcircuit design. The system is supplied in this case from circuit 3 and the pneumatic auxiliary release device of the spring type actuators from circuit 4. An additionally required rotary knob, shuttle or check valve can be omitted.
In the version with steep droop characteristic curve , the start of braking is attained earlier and the actuation range is significantly greater. This is particularly advantageous when the parking brake is used as a secondary brake.
As an alternative to the pneumatic parking brake valve, there are electronically controlled parking brake systems and an operating unit. The EPB module contains a bistable valve that can be controlled via integrated solenoid valves and further solenoid valves for executing the trailer test function.
The parking brake can be applied and released using the operating unit, whereby the last active state is retained even after the supply voltage is shut off. Since the operating unit must have a graduable design, the parking brake can also be operated in stages and consequently function as a secondary brake.
As well as manual activation by operating unit, the EPB also provides for a series of comfort and convenience functions, e.g., automatic application when the vehicle is at a standstill .
Automatic load sensitive  braking force regulator A facility frequently used in the servicebrake system of commercial vehicles with pneumatically controlled service brake systems is automatic load sensitive braking force control .
with relay valve 1 Vent, 2 Rake, 3 Transfer diaphragm, 4 Energy input from air reservoir, 5 Vent, 6 Uncontrolled pressure from servicebrake valve, 7 Control valve, 8 Relay piston, 9 Controlled brake pressure  to brake cylinders, 10 Rotary cam.
partial pressure to flow : in to the top of the diaphragm. Thus, up to this pressure there is no reduction in brake cylinder pressure. This results in the synchronous application of the brakes on all vehicle axles.
As an alternative to the pneumatic ALB valve, pneumatically controlled brake systems are increasingly making use of the EBD function .
the other and exert force on a joint push rod. A distinction can be made between combined cylinders for S cam brakes, wedge actuated brakes, and disk brakes based on the type of wheel brake.
The two cylinders can be actuated independently of one another. Simultaneous actuation results in the addition of their forces. This can be prevented by installing a special relay valve in order to automatically prevent mechanical overloading of other downstream components (e. g.
A central release screw allows for a tensioning of the spring of the spring type brake cylinder without compressed air having to be applied . This is necessary to assist fitting or, in the event of failure of the compressed air, to be able to maneuver the vehicle.
When the service brakes are operated, compressed air flows into the diaphragm cylinder and presses the plunger disk and the push rod against the lever in the disk brake. A drop in air pressure releases the brake.
When compressed air flows into the spring type actuator part, the piston presses the springs together and the brake is released. If the chamber is vented, the spring type brake cylinder exerts a force via the piston rod on the diaphragm part and presses the push rod into the mechanism of the disk brake via the piston disk.
for disk brake .
Trailer control valve: The trailer control valve installed in the tractor controls the trailer's service brake. This multi circuit relay valve is triggered by both service brake circuits and by the parking brake . This increases the pressure in chamber II for the brake line to the trailer. When air enters chamber IV, the brake line is vented again.
If the brake line to the trailer is pulled off, it is prescribed that the pressure in the supply line to the trailer must have fallen to a pressure of 1.5 bar in less than two seconds . To achieve this, the compressed air supply to the supply line is throttled by means of an integrated valve.
1 and 2 Compression spring, 3 Control plunger, 4 Spring assembly, 5 Outlet valve seat, 6 Disk, 7 Inlet valve seat, 8 Compression spring, 9 Throttle pin, 10 Housing, 11 and 12 Control plunger, 13 Adjusting screw, 14 Compression spring, 15 Valve disk, 16 Reaction piston, 17 Collar, 18 Control plunger.
Ports: 1.1 Energy input from circuit 3, 2.1 Energy output to "Supply"  coupling head , 4.1 Control port  uncontrolled pressure circuit 1, 4.2 Control port  uncontrolled pressure circuit 2, 4.3 Control port parking brake, 3 Central vent.
5 6 VI VII VIII 1.1 4.2 4.1 4.3 V II I III 2.1 2.2 12 15 16 18 3 2 3 4 7 8 9 13 11 14 10 1 17 IV UFB0525 2Y
Electronically controlled : brake system Requirements and functions With the further development of the dualline compressed air brake system, an electronic .
1 Four circuit protection valve, 2 Air reservoir, 3 Service brake valve with braking level sensor,  4 Single channel pressure control module, 5 Brake cylinder, 6 Wheel speed sensor,  7 Brake lining wear sensor, 8 EBS ECU in tractor vehicle, 9 Two channel pressure control module, 10 Pressure sensor, 11 Air spring bellows, 12 Trailer control valve, 13 "Supply" coupling head , 16 Line filter, 17 Trailer brake valve with release device, 18 EBS ECU in trailer. SU US SU SU US US UP UP UP 5 15 14 12 13 16 17 2 5 6 7 10 11 6 9 7 8 18 3 2 2 4 4 5 5 5 9 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 7 10 11 6 6 7 6 7 1 a b 2 UFB0567Y
culates for each wheel an individual brake : pressure and in turn activates the pressure control modules on the individual axles so that the required brake pressure is applied to the brake cylinders downstream of the pressure control modules. The applied brake pressure is regulated with the aid of integrated pressure sensors in the pressure control modules. A pneumatic brake pressure generation is performed in parallel in the pneumatic part of the service brake valve which on the one hand determines the brake feel and on the other hand acts as a fallback level in the event of an electrical fault.
The brake pressure modules are available as one channel or two channel designs. If the vehicle is set up to tow a trailer, a trailer control module is also provided as a substitute for the trailer control valve. This trailer control module is likewise activated in the braking operation by the central ECU and makes an adapted control pressure available at the "Brake" coupling head . The trailer must nevertheless also be pneumatically coupled, because this is the only way that the trailer can be supplied with pressure and in the event of a system failure pneumatically controlled. By controlling the electronic brake system in the trailer, it is possible to provide optimum matching with regard to braking performance between the tractor vehicle and the trailer. Simultaneous and matched braking performance facilitate optimized coupling forcing matching.
Further functions, such as antilock braking system .
If an electrical fault occurs, the vehicle can be braked by means of one or two redundant pneumatic circuits with at least the demanded secondary braking effect, and the trailer brake system controlled. Optimum cooperation between all the systems can be achieved through data communication with other systems in the vehicle and the trailer. Optimized deceleration and acceleration processes and additional functions can be realized in this way.
Components of the electronic  brake system Electronic control unit The control point of an electronic brake system consists of a central ECU in which all the system functions run. Aside from the cab mounted variants, frame mounted ECUs are increasingly gaining acceptance. The benefit of the latter is that the sensors for yaw rate and lateral acceleration can be integrated and consequently there is no need for a separate sensor to be fitted.
redundant sensor detects the driver's brake request by measuring the operating travel of the valve tappet. The measured value is transmitted to the central ECU and converted there into a braking request. In the same way as a conventional service brake valve, the pneumatic control pressure is applied according to the actuation travel. These control pressures are required for "backup" control in the event of a fault.
Pneumatic ports: 11 Energy input, circuit 1, 12 Energy input, circuit 2, 21 Back up control pressure, circuit 1, 22 Back up control pressure, circuit 2. UFB0724 2Y 1 3 4 5 4 2 21 22 11 12
Pressure control modules: Pressure control modules The pressure control modules  are the interface between the electronic brake system and the pneumatically actuated wheel brakes. They convert the required braking pressures transmitted via the CAN bus into pneumatic pressures. This conversion operation is usually performed with an inlet and outlet solenoid combination. A pressure sensor measures the controlled brake pressure and thus facilitates brake pressure control in the closed control loop. The electrically activated "backup" valve shuts off the pneumatic control pressures of the service brake valve in order to permit interference free electrical pressure control. Mounting the pressure control modules close to the wheels means that the electrical wires for connecting the wheel speed sensors and the brake lining wear sensors can be kept short. The information is prepared in the pressure control module and transmitted via the CAN bus to the central ECU. This reduces the outlay on cabling in the vehicle.
Trailer control module Trailer control module The electronic trailer control module  enables modulation of the trailer control pressure according to the functional requirements of the electronic brake system. The limits of the electrical control ranges are defined by legal requirements. The electronically specified setpoint value is converted into a physical braking pressure by means of a solenoid arrangement similar to that in the pressure control module. The "backup" pressure is shut off either by a "backup" solenoid or by pneumatic retention, depending on the type of design adopted. Under all normal conditions, the trailer control module must be activated by two independent control signals. This may be two pneumatic signals from two control circuits, or one pneumatic and one electrical control signal.
________________________________ References for Brake systems for References for Brake systems for  commercial vehicles commercial vehicles Directive 71/320/EEC: Council Directive of 26 July 1971 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the brake systems of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers.
pressure control module 1 ECU, 2 Speed sensor,  3 Brake lining sensor,  4 CAN, 5 "Backup" valve,  6 Inlet valve, 7 Outlet valve,  8 Pressure sensor, 9 Filter, 10 Relay valve, 11 Muffler.
UFB0725 2Y 4 3 1 2 4 3 1 2 1 2 1 2 U P 2 2 3 1 4 1B 2B 3A 4A 2 1 3 6 7 4 2 5 11 10 9 8
Continuous operation : brake systems Commercial vehicles essentially use two types of continuous operation brake systems, deployed separately or in combination: the exhaust brake system and the retarder.
Exhaust brake systems The resistance which an engine brings to the speed imposed from the outside without a fuel supply is termed the engine or exhaust brake, or drag power. The drag power of standard engines is 5 to 7 kW per liter displacement. With a pure exhaust brake the regulation according to SS41 or the road traffic licensing regulations in Germany , s.. 15 cannot be observed. Further measures can be used to increase the effect of the exhaust brake.
Exhaust brake system with Exhaust brake system with exhaust flap exhaust flap In the exhaust brake with exhaust flap, a valve with a flap closes the exhaust train. The fuel supply is interrupted at the same time. As a result, back pressure is generated in the exhaust gas system and must be overcome by each piston during its exhaust stroke . The braking power can be regulated by means of a pressure control valve in the exhaust train. Additionally, this valve ensures that at high revs an excessively high pressure does not result in valve or valve gear damage. The exhaust brake is the most common variant used in trucks and buses, delivering a braking power of 14 to 20 kW per liter displacement.
Exhaust brake system with Exhaust brake system with constant constant throttle throttle The exhaust brake with constant throttle is also known as a decompression brake. In this system, the work performed by the engine in the compression phase is not utilized. The exhaust valves or an additional valve . This combination can deliver braking power of 30 to 40 kW per liter displacement.
flap and constant throttle 1 Compressed air,  2 Exhaust flap, 3 Exhaust,  4 Constant throttle,  5 Intake, 6 Piston .
Retarder: Retarders are wear free continuous operation brakes. There are two types that differ in how they operate: hydrodynamic and electrodynamic retarders. Both systems, and the exhaust brake systems, relieve the load on the service brake system and thereby increase the economic efficiency of the vehicle. The use of a hydrodynamic retarder can increase the service life of the service brake by a factor of 4 to 5.
In modern vehicles, retarders are incorporated into the brake management system. The exhaust brake and the retarder are often combined as a continuous operation brake in a vehicle. The brakes must then be activated by means of the electronic brake management system.
Hydrodynamic retarder Hydrodynamic retarder Hydrodynamic retarders, also known simply as hydraulic retarders, can be subdivided into the categories of primary retarders and secondary retarders.
The primary retarder is located between the engine and the transmission, the secondary retarder between the transmission and the powered axle. Both primary and secondary retarders operate in the same way. When the retarder is activated, oil is pumped into the working area. The driven rotor accelerates this oil and transfers it at the outside diameter to the stator . There the oil strikes the static stator blades and is decelerated. The oil flows at the inside diameter to the rotor. The rotor's rotary motion is inhibited, and the vehicle is decelerated.
The kinetic energy is primarily converted into heat. For this reason, some of the oil must be permanently cooled by a heat exchanger.
The braking torque can be input using a hand lever or the brake pedal . A retarder's braking torque is dependent on the degree of fill in the working area between the rotor and the stator. The degree of fill is regulated by an ECU via a control pressure which is adjusted by proportioning valves.
A retarder can be activated hydraulically or pneumatically, whereby the braking torque can be achieved in discrete braking stages and also steplessly. Oil is primarily used as the working medium in a retarder. Current hydraulic retarders can deliver braking power up to 600 kW for brief periods. However, the continuous braking power of a retarder is dependent on the cooling capacity of the vehicle's cooling system. Modern vehicles can dissipate a continuous braking power from a retarder of 300 to 350 kW via the cooling system. Sensors are used to record overheating of the retarder or the cooling system, and if necessary the braking power is reduced under controlled conditions until the braking power equals the dissipatable quantity of heat.
of a retarder as illustrated  by a ZF intarder by way of example 1 High speed stage, 2 Output flange, 3 Stator, 4 Rotor.
transmitted through the powered axles : and the transmission in such a way that the total overrun torque is directed through the transmission. The braking effect of the primary retarder is dependent on the engine speed and the selected gear, but is not dependent on the vehicle's output speed and driving speed. This lack of dependence on the output speed is one of the major advantages of primary retarders. These are highly effective at speeds below 25 to 30 km/h . This is the reason why primary retarders are primarily used in vehicles which are driven at lower average speeds such as city buses and municipal vehicles. Their compact design is another advantage. A disadvantage of primary retarders is that the braking force is interrupted during a gear change. The braking force must be reduced during gear changing.
braking torque falls off dramatically. Because of its design, the secondary retarder can also be subsequently adapted to a transmission. The extra weight of a secondary retarder with accompanying heat exchanger and oil fill is often cited as a disadvantage, since the additional mass reduces the vehicle payload.
retarder up to 600 kW braking power  1 High speed gear, 2 Output flange,  3 Intake passage, 4 Control housing,  5 Coolant inlet, 6 Heat exchanger,  7 Electronics, 8 Pinion shaft, 9 Stator, 10 Rotor, 11 Discharge passage,  12 Pump, 13 Coolant outlet.
1 2 7 5 6 4 3 8 9 13 12 10 11  100 80 60 40 20 kN Speed Advantage Secondary retarder Advantage Primary retarder 0 20 40 14th gear 6th gear 60 80 100 km/h Braking force at wheel 12th gear 10th gear 8th gear 1 2 SFB0806Y SFB0805 3E
magnetic fields and thus build up a brak : ing effect. The braking torque is determined by the strength of the excitation field, the rotational speed, and the air gap between the stator and the rotors. The braking torque decreases as the air gap increases; this air gap can be adjusted by means of spacers. Shift stages with different braking torques are obtained by interconnecting the field coils in different configurations. The heat generated is dissipated by convection and radiation to atmosphere via the internally ventilated rotor disks.
As the rotors are increasingly heated, the braking power of the electrodynamic retarder decreases significantly . The retarder's braking power is reduced by thermal protection in order to prevent the retarder from being destroyed by excessive temperature during braking operation.
Like the primary retarder, the electrodynamic retarder is distinguished by high braking power at low engine speeds and relative design simplicity. On the downside, however, it can weigh up to 350 kg, depending on its size.
________________________________ References for continuous operation  References for continuous operation  brake systems brake systems E. Hoepke, S. Breuer : Nutzfahrzeugtechnik, 8th Edition, Verlag Springer Vieweg, 2016.
Brake cold 2nd gear 4th gear 6th gear 6th gear 4th gear 2nd gear 1.2 0.8 0.4 0 0 20 40 60 80 km/h Driving speed Deceleration m/s2 UFB0321 1Y UFB0322 1E UFB0323E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 9 8 3 Nm 3,000 2,000 1,000 0 0 1,000 2,000 rpm Transmission stage 4 4a 3 2 1 Speed Braking torque
Wheel brakes are friction brakes that con : vert kinetic energy into heat energy during braking. Disk and drum brakes are used as wheel brakes. Hydraulic pressure are converted into an application force to press the brake pads and linings against the brake disks and drums respectively.
In passenger car applications the thermal demands placed on wheel brakes can, in view of ever increasing vehicle weights and higher attainable driving speeds, only be satisfied by disk brakes. Drum brakes are now only used in subcompact size cars on the rear axle.
In the commercial vehicle sector disk brakes have gained acceptance for onroad applications in Europe and increasingly in North America as well. In markets with less well developed road infrastructures and in applications with greater offroad usage drum brakes still play a significant role since they react more robustly to dirt and are easier to handle .
1 Brake caliper housing,  2 Dust protection seal,  3 Sealing ring,  4 Coupling,  5 Piston,  6 Threaded spindle,  7 Bleeder valve,  8 Parking brake  mechanism,  9 Cam plate,  10 Hydraulic port, 11 Shaft,  12 Parking brake lever,  13 Spring, 14 Outer brake pad, 15 Piston side brake pad.
SFB0791 1Y 1 13 14 15 2 9 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 12 11 UFB0281 2Y a 4 3 2 1 2 b 4 3 1 2 5
Principle of the Principle of the fixed caliper brake fixed caliper brake In a fixed caliper brake, both halves of the housing . Ports in the housing halves connect the two pistons hydraulically.
Principle of the floating caliper brake Principle of the floating caliper brake In a floating caliper brake, a piston presses the piston side .
Braking with the service brake Braking with the service brake The hydraulic pressure generated by the brake master cylinder enters the cylinder chamber behind the piston via the hydraulic connection. The piston is shifted forwards and the brake pad on the piston side is applied to the brake disk. The reaction force that arises shifts the brake caliper housing mounted in a bolt guide against the direction of piston movement. This also means that the outer brake pad is applied to the brake disk. The path of the brake pads and of the piston covered up to that point is referred to as clearance. Another increase in pressure increases the downforce of the brake pads.
Releasing the service brake Releasing the service brake When the piston moves through the clearance, the sealing ring, which is rectangle in its initial position, is deformed. The deformed sealing ring pulls the piston back by the clearance when the hydraulic pressure drops .
Braking with the integrated Braking with the integrated parking brake parking brake When the integrated parking brake is operated, the force is transferred via the handbrake cable to the parking brake lever. This is then twisted and the rotary motion is transferred via the shaft to the cam plate. As the balls run onto the cam plate, the piston is shifted via the pressure sleeve in the parking brake mechanism; the threaded spindle bolted in this mechanism is shifted towards the brake pad. After crossing the clearance, first the brake pad on the piston side and then the outer brake pad are pressed against the brake disk.
Releasing the parking brake Releasing the parking brake After releasing the handbrake lever, the parking brake lever, the shaft and the cam plate turn back to their initial positions. The pressure sleeve, the threaded spindle and the piston are pressed back into their initial position by the springs in the parking brake mechanism. The final clearance is reached as the sealing ring reassumes its shape.
Automatic self adjusting mechanism Automatic self adjusting mechanism Wear on the brake pads and brake disks increases the clearance and thus has to be balanced out. This automatic clearance compensation takes place during braking. The inside diameter of the rectangular piston sealing ring is slightly smaller than the piston diameter. The sealing ring thus surrounds the piston with a pre tension. During braking the piston moves towards the brake disk and tensions the sealing ring, which as a result of its static friction can then slip on the piston only when the piston travel between brake pad and brake disk has in response to abrasion on the brake pads has become greater than the envisaged clearance. When the brake is released the piston is pulled back only by the envisaged clearance. In this way, stepless readjustment to a constant clearance is possible.
The clearance compensation of the parking brake mechanism also takes place on application of the service brake. The clearance of a brake caliper is approx. 0.15 mm and is thus in the range of the maximum permissible static disk run out (axial movement per brake disk
Brake disks are usually manufactured from gray cast iron. A higher proportion of carbon improves the heat absorption capability and noise damping performance. Alloys containing chrome or molybdenum for example also increase wear resistance. More thermally resistant brake disks made of ceramic containing silicon carbide reinforced with carbon fiber are also used on sports cars and luxury class cars.
High corrosion requirements are imposed on brake disks due to their installation position directly on the wheel and the high mileage. Brake disks are partially or completely coated to improve corrosion resistance. High heat resisting paints or for example coatings containing zinc are used.
The last few years have also seen the introduction of built up brake disks. These brake disks have a separation between the friction ring and the chamber area. The chamber area is usually made of a different material . A distinction is made between screwed, cast, riveted, and combined positive and non positive connections.
Brake pads for disk brakes: Brake pads for disk brakes Function and requirements The decelerating force during the braking operation is generated by sliding friction between the brake pad and the brake disk. The coefficient of friction denotes the ratio between the tensioning force generated by the brake caliper and the resulting decelerating frictional force between the pad and the disk. For passenger cars it ranges between 0.3 and 0.5 and is included in the chassis system configuration.
wide ranges. Furthermore, the wear on the brake pads and the brake disk must be appropriately low. The dust emissions associated with wear should also be kept as low as possible and the composition of these emissions should pollute the environment as little as possible. Brake systems should also operate with as little noise as possible.
Optimum tuning of the brake system to the vehicle is quite significantly achieved via the properties of the brake pad, the design and manufacture of which, of all the components in the system, opens up the most wide ranging possibilities.
Design The brake pad usually made of steel serves to support the braking force exerted by the friction lining against the brake caliper and conversely to transfer the piston force as uniformly as possible to the lining friction surface. To this end, the back plate must adhere to exact dimensional tolerances so as to avoid braking noises or unreliable functioning. In addition, the material must exhibit sufficient strength so as not to permit any plastic deformation at the contact faces or hooks. In many a design the back plate still supports the strength of the brake caliper.
For the most part, anti noise shims or films are glued, riveted or even attached with clips to the back of the brake pad painted for corrosion protection purposes. They are for the most part essential for avoiding noise emissions. It is important here to ensure that the shims cannot be appreciably displaced over the period of operation. Otherwise, unwanted contact between the anti noise shim and brake or wheel components may result under adverse circumstances. Clips for positioning and locating in the piston and caliper may still be required for fitting in the brake. Manufacture The most cost effective solution is, after cleaning off oxide coatings and oil residues, to apply a coating of a highly thermally and chemically stable adhesive. Racing cars and a number of heavy, high performance premium vehicles also use bonding variants which establish positive locking between the pad and the carrier, and thus are above all much more thermally resistant but at the same time significantly more expensive than an adhesive bonding.
with the back plate adhesive to form a : component. In the process all the other ingredients are also integrated into the binder matrix usually consisting of highly chemically and thermally resistant phenolic resin. This so called hot pressing process with dry mixtures has become established in the mass market as the best combination of reliability, range of adjustments of physical properties, product variance, and costs.
some of the raw materials normally used in brake pads. Aside from their concentration in the recipe, their effect in the brake pad is also determined by their individual composition, microstructure, and particle size. Reliable braking performance with low wear is obtained only by choosing ideal ingredients and carefully optimizing the concentrations of the metal, abrasive, and lubricant proportions. Physical mechanical properties for sufficient strength and particularly also for comfortable, noise free braking are adjusted by means of tribologically neutral fillers in broad concentration ranges. Only with this complexity of recipes can the high, sometimes contradictory requirements regarding friction loss, reliability, wear, and braking comfort be optimally reconciled for the majority of drivers.
Between the friction lining and the adhesive a roughly 2...3 mm thick intermediate layer similar mechanically and chemically to the friction lining can be used for example to improve the pad connection or damp braking noises.
Finally, a brake pad must be clearly marked to denote its country of use in order for example to display the regulatory approval for use in public traffic. The markings are usually printed or stamped on the backs of the brake pads.
concentration ranges of brake pad recipes for use in Europe Raw material group Raw material Volume % Metals Steel wool Aluminum wool Copper wool Zinc powder 10...15 Binders Phenolic resin Caoutchouc 15...20 Fillers Silicates, e.g.
Mica powder  Talcum Chalk 20...50 Abrasives Aluminum oxide Silicon carbide 2...5 Lubricants Molybdenum sulfide Tin sulfide 2...10 Organic fibers Aramide fiber Cellulose fiber 2...5 Graphite and coke Graphite and  coke 10...25
ipes constitute a current conflict of goals : for the development of friction materials. Up to half the weight of semi met pads is made up of iron materials. They represent a good cost compromise with weaknesses in the high load and high temperature ranges.
Disk brakes for commercial vehicles Special disk brakes have been developed for commercial vehicles. These disk brakes are actuated with compressed air. Because the pressure here is much smaller than that in a hydraulic brake, the brake cylinders cannot be integrated into the brake calipers. They must be flanged into position .
Functioning principle Operating concept of the service brake Operating concept of the service brake When air enters the service brake cylinder, the eccentrically mounted brake lever is actuated. The brake cylinder force is boosted by the lever ratio and transferred via the bridge and plungers to the inner brake pad. The reaction force that arises at the brake caliper is transferred by shifting the brake caliper to the outer brake pad.
1 Brake caliper, 2a Inner brake pad, 2b Outer brake pad, 3 Brake disk, 4 Plunger, 5 Bridge, 6 Eccentrically mounted brake lever, 7 Service brake cylinder, 8 Spring type actuator. 8 7 5 4 1 2b 2a 3 6 SFB0787Y
Automatic self adjusting mechanism Automatic self adjusting mechanism Disk brakes pneumatically or mechanically actuated by the spring type actuator are fitted with automatic clearance compensation.
Wear monitoring Wear monitoring Continuous wear monitoring may also be provided. This is required in the case of electronic brake systems for wear adaptation and for service information systems. Brake disks Solid brake disks are used less frequently on commercial vehicles because they can only dissipate the heat slowly. Internally ventilated brake disks have a larger surface through which heat exchange can take place. In this design two friction rings are connected via bridges. The rotation of the brake disk creates on the inside a radial ventilation effect in the outward direction.
Brake disks for commercial vehicles are usually manufactured from gray cast iron. The carbon content increased up to the saturation limit provides good thermal conductivity.
Drum brakes Drum brakes are radial brakes with two brake shoes. They generate their braking force on the inner friction surface of a brake drum.
1 Direction of rotation of brake drum  with vehicle moving forwards, 2 Self augmentation, 3 Self inhibition, 4 Torque, 5 Double acting wheel brake cylinder, 6 Leading brake shoe , 9 Brake drum, 10 Brake lining.
UFB0681 2Y 1 2 3 7 4 4 6 8 5 a b 8 1 2 3 7 4 4 6 8 5 9 9 10 10 10 10
At the brake shoe that rotates in the di : rection of the brake drum which diminishes the applied application force. This therefore creates a self inhibiting effect.
Sliding shoe guides are used in simplex, duplex, duo duplex, servo and duoservo brakes. Brake shoes with a fixed pivot are subject to unequal levels of wear in that they cannot center themselves like sliding shoes.
Principle of the Principle of the simplex brake simplex brake A double acting wheel brake cylinder actuates the brake shoes . When the vehicle is moving forwards, self augmentation affects the leading brake shoe and self inhibition affects the trailing brake shoe; the pattern is the same when the vehicle is backing up.
Principle of the Principle of the duplex brake duplex brake Each brake shoe is actuated by a single acting wheel brake cylinder . The brake shoes designed as sliding shoes are supported on the back of the opposing wheel brake cylinder. The duplex brake is single acting, i.e., it has two leading self augmenting brake shoes when the vehicle is moving forwards.
Simplex drum brake Functioning principle of passenger car Functioning principle of passenger car brake brake The principle of a drum brake is explained using a hydraulically operated simplex drum brake with integrated parking brake and automatic self adjusting mechanism as an example . Wear is therefore greater on the primary lining. This lining is thicker or longer in design to compensate.
1 Direction of rotation of brake drum with vehicle moving forwards, 2 Self augmentation, 3 Torque, 4 Wheel brake cylinder, 5 Fulcrums, 6 Brake shoes, 7 Brake drum,  8 Brake lining.
During braking the diaphragm brake cylinder is exposed to compressed air. This displaces the wedge to the right. The wedge slides between the pressure rollers. These roll on the wedge and the thrust members. The generated application force is transferred via the thrust members to the brake shoes. The excessive clearance created by brake lining wear is compensated for by the adjusting mechanism.
1 Wheel brake cylinder, 2 Brake lining, 3 Extension spring ,  15 Brake shoe pin bushing.
On simplex drum brakes for passenger cars, the adjuster is part of the push rod or pressure sleeve situated under initial spring tension between the brake shoes. When the permissible clearance is exceeded, the adjuster automatically lengthens the push rod or pressure sleeve .
In commercial vehicles with S cams, the adjuster is part of the brake lever. For this purpose it has manual adjustment or is designed as an automatic linkage adjuster.
Parking brake A parking brake is integrated in the drum brake. The brake cable is actuated either via the handbrake lever inside the vehicle or via an electric motor with spindle. The handbrake lever is mounted at the top of the trailing brake shoe. When the parking brake is operated, the brake cable pulls the handbrake lever downwards to the right, causing the handbrake lever to press the brake shoes via the push rod against the brake drum.
________________________________ References References ECE R13 H: Regulation No. 13 H of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Uniform provisions concerning the approval of passenger cars with regard to braking.
1 Wheel brakes, 2 Wheel speed sensors, 3 Engine control unit, 4 Throttle valve, 5 Brake booster with  brake master cylinder, 6 Hydraulic unit with  add on ECU.
the wheel speed referred to the velocity of : the wheel center in the longitudinal direction is regulated by modulating the braking or drive torque. There is a fundamental distinction between the antilock braking function where any further increase in slip generally results in a reduction in adhesion. When braking, this results in wheel lock within a few tenths of a second. When accelerating, one or both of the driven wheels start to spin more and more as the drive torque exceeds the adhesion by an ever increasing amount.
Effect of ABS and TCS As brake slip increases the ABS function becomes active and prevents the wheels from locking; as drive slip increases TCS prevents the wheels from spinning. Thanks to ABS the vehicle retains its directional stability and steerability even under emergency braking on a slippery road surface. The dangerous phenomenon of jackknifing is also prevented in commercial vehicle combinations. The TCS function optimizes the transmission of forces of the drive wheels when accelerating and thereby improves both traction and stability.
its components for a passenger car with a hydraulic brake system. In contrast to passenger cars, commercial vehicles have pneumatic power brake systems . Nevertheless, the functional description of an ABS or TCS control process for passenger cars also applies in principle to commercial vehicles.
Control systems ABS control Basic closed loop Basic closed loop control process control process The wheel speed sensor senses the state of motion of the wheel to stop increasing or to reduce wheel brake pressure until the danger of wheel lock is averted. The braking pressure must then rise again to ensure that the wheel is not underbraked. During automatic brake control, the stability or instability of wheel motion must be detected constantly, and kept within the slip range at maximum braking force by a sequence of pressure rise, pressure retention and pressure drop phases.
of a passenger car system 1 Brake pedal, 2 Brake booster,  3 Brake master cylinder with fluid reservoir,  4 Wheel brake cylinder,  5 Wheel speed sensor,  6 Indicator lamp.
UFB0689 1E Disturbance values Act on braking pressure Monitor Build up braking pressure
ing pressure is slowly raised until, when the wheel acceleration again falls below the threshold, the second control cycle is initiated, this time with an immediate pressure drop.
In the first control cycle, a short pressure holding phase was initially necessary to filter out any faults. In the case of high wheel moments of inertia, low friction coefficient and slow pressure rise in the wheel brake cylinder , the wheel might lock without any response from the deceleration switching threshold. In this case, therefore, the wheel slip is also included as a parameter in the brake control system.
Under certain road surface conditions, passenger cars with all wheel drive and with differential locks engaged pose problems when the ABS system is in operation; this calls for special measures to take into account the reference speed during the control process, lower the wheel deceleration thresholds, and reduce the engine drag torque.
Control cycle with Control cycle with yaw moment  yaw moment  build up delay build up delay When the brakes are applied on a road surface with uneven grip .
front wheel with the higher coefficient of : friction at the road surface .
The yaw moment build up delay 1 system . In all cases in which yaw moment build up delay comes into effect, the high wheel is under braked at first. This means that the yaw moment build up delay must always be very carefully adapted to the vehicle in question in order to limit increases in stopping distances.
Curve 6 in Figure 6 shows that for an ABS system without yaw moment build up delay a significantly higher steering angle is required when countersteering.
ABS control methods ABS control methods The axle based ABS control methods differ essentially in the number of control channels and the behavior when braking at u split. Individual control Individual control, whereby each wheel is individually slip controlled, produces the shortest braking distances. The drawback, however, is the yaw moment occurring under u split conditions, which must be compensated for by appropriate countersteering. This method is used exclusively on the rear axle since the steering and yaw moments occurring at the front axle would not be controllable for the driver when braking at u split.
Select low control Select low control , as a result of which both wheels on one axle receive the same brake pressure. Therefore only one single pressure control channel per axle is required. Under u split conditions this produces optimum steerability and directional stability at the expense of braking distance. In the case of homogenous friction coefficients, braking distance, steerability, and directional stability are similar to those of the other methods.
Individual control, modified "Individual control, modified" has proven to be a good compromise between steerability, stability, and braking distance. This two channel control method necessitates a pressure control channel at each wheel on the axle. By appropriately limiting the brake pressure difference between the right and left sides, the yaw and steering moments are restricted to a controllable extent. This results in a braking distance which is only a little longer than that for individual control, but it does ensure that vehicles with critical handling characteristics remain controllable.
steering angle characteristic with yaw moment build up delay 1 Brake master cylinder pressure pMC,  2 Brake pressure phigh w/o YMBD,  3 Brake pressure phigh w/ YMBD 1,  4 Brake pressure phigh w/ YMBD 2,  5 Brake pressure plow at "low wheel",  6 Req. steering angle a w/o YMBD,  7 Req. steering angle a w/ YMBD.
To optimize traction all the driven wheels must utilize their individual friction coefficients to the maximum to the best possible extent. To this end, the wheel speeds are synchronized by active braking of the spinning wheels . In this way, the braking torque exerted on the spinning wheel is available through transmission by the differential to the non spinning wheel as drive torque.
To ensure directional stability, the wheel slip is controlled with the aid of the drive torque by the engine controller in such a way as to achieve the best possible compromise between traction and lateral stability.
Using the brake control function described above, the driving wheels can also be synchronized so that a mechanical differential lock, if fitted, can be activated automatically, e.g., with the aid of a pneumatic cylinder. The ABS/TCS ECU calculates the correct point and conditions for releasing the differential lock.
In contrast to mechanical differential locks, the tires do not scrub on tight corners. A fundamental observation about this type of system is that it is not intended for continuous use on difficult offroad terrain. Since the brake control function is achieved by braking the relevant wheel, brake heating is an inevitable consequence.
For multi axle vehicles with complex drive configurations and a number of differentials , which results in unstable handling. In this case, engine drag torque control increases the wheel speeds by increasing the drive torque and thereby prevents the impending instability. The actively exerted drive torque is limited for safety reasons.
Electronic load dependent braking force regulation Load differences and the dynamic axle load shift that occurs during sharp braking call for an adaptation of the braking forces. This was originally performed by ALB valves , which reduce the brake pressure usually on the rear axle depending on the axle load. In current ABS systems this function is assumed by electronic load dependent braking force regulation. Here, under minimal deceleration conditions, the differential slip between the front and rear axles is minimized, whereby the brake pressure on the rear axle is electronically reduced. This results, assuming the same friction conditions on both axles, in identical braking and consequently optimum braking under driving dynamics considerations. This function dispenses with the need for the additional ALB valve.
wheel slip in the direction of wheel rotation on one or more wheels when braked. ECE R13 Annex 13 defines three categories. The present generation of ABS meets the highest level of requirements .
Components An ABS or ABS/TCS system consists of the following components: wheel speed sensors, electronic control unit .
Wheel speed sensors Wheel speed sensors The most important input variables for controlling wheel slip are the wheel speeds, which are recorded by wheelspeed sensors. These sensors scan a rotating sensor ring and generate an electrical signal with a frequency proportional to the rotational speed . There are basically two different types of rpm sensor: active and passive. The active rpm sensors used predominantly in passenger cars operate according to the Hall principle and can record, aside from the road speed signal, further information such as the temperature and transmit it to the ECU.
1 Brake master cylinder, 2 Wheel brake cylinder, 3 Hydraulic unit, 4 Inlet valve,  5 Outlet valve, 6 Return pump, 7 Accumulator, 8 Pump motor. R Right, L Left, F Front, R Rear, UFB0749E M LR RF LF RR 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1
ergized for pressure drop can be made smaller. This results in quite significant savings in weight and size.
The 2/2 way solenoid valves are available in a variety of designs and specifications, and, because of their compact dimensions and excellent dynamics, they allow fast electrical switching times sufficient for pulse width modulated cyclic operation. In other words, they have "proportional valve characteristics".
ABS 8 from Bosch . This mechatronic optimization has positive effects not only on function but also on user friendliness, i.e., noise and pedal feedback.
ABS 8 is capable of specific adaptation to individual vehicle class requirements by varying the components . The power of the return motor can vary within a range of approx. 90 to 200 watts. The accumulator chamber size is also variable.
Hydraulic unit of an ABS/TCS system Hydraulic unit of an ABS/TCS system On passenger cars with hydraulic brake systems, an expanded ABS hydraulic unit is required for TCS brake intervention. Depending on the variant, the expansion can comprise an intake valve and a changeover valve . An additional hydraulic presupply pump and a pressure accumulator may be required. During a necessary brake intervention, the intake and changeover valves assigned to the spinning wheel and the ABS return pump are electrically actuated. The return pump can draw brake fluid from the brake master cylinder through the intake valve. The changeover valve blocks the return flow to the brake master cylinder. The pressure generated by the return pump passes through the inlet valve to the wheel brake cylinder of the spinning wheel, as a result of which the wheel is braked and prevented from spinning. Braking pressure is built up, as dictated by the situation and adapted by continuous monitoring of the control process, by alternating and electrically clocked actuation of the inlet and outlet valves in the hydraulic unit.
Electronic control unit The ECU processes the signals supplied by the wheel speed sensors. After these signals have been conditioned and filtered, a vehicle reference speed is calculated and this forms the basis for the wheel slip calculation. To form the reference speed the individual rotational speed signals are, depending on the respective driving situation and other criteria, corrected if necessary with different weighting.
Because of the safety relevance of the slip control functions, the ECUs contain comprehensive safety and diagnostic functions to monitor the complete system on a permanent basis. Detected faults lead to partial or full shutdown of the system and are stored in a fault memory. This can be interrogated in the garage workshop with a diagnosis tester and deleted after the faults have been cleared.
ABS system variants A variety of versions are available depending on the brake circuit configuration, the vehicle's drivetrain configuration, functional requirements and cost considerations. The most common brake circuit configuration is the diagonal split . Each wheel has its own wheelspeed sensor to monitor wheel speed.
with X brake circuit configuration 1 Brake master cylinder, 2 Wheel brake cylinder, 3 Hydraulic unit, 4 Intake valve, 5 Changeover valve, 6 Inlet valve, 7 Outlet valve, 8 Accumulator, 9 Return pump, 10 Pump motor.
3 channel system with three sensors: 3 channel system with three sensors Instead of the familiar arrangement with a separate speed sensor on each wheel, the rear wheels with this variant share a single sensor which is fitted in the differential. Due to the characteristics of the differential, it allows the measurement of wheel speed differences with certain restrictions. Due to the select low control characteristic for the rear wheels, i.e., parallel connection of the two rear wheel brakes, a single hydraulic channel is sufficient for control of the rear braking pressures.
3 sensor systems can only be used on vehicles with rear wheel drive, i.e., primarily small commercial vehicles and light trucks. The number of vehicles fitted with such systems is generally dropping off. 2 channel system with one or two sensors 2 channel system with one or two sensors Two channel systems were produced because of the smaller number of components required and the resulting potential for cost savings. Their popularity was limited as their functionality does not match that of "full fledged" systems. These systems are now hardly ever used in cars. TCS engine control intervention  in passenger cars On passenger cars with diesel engines, engine control intervention is performed, depending on the variant, by means of electronic diesel control or the ETC .
On passenger cars with gasoline engines, torque reduction is usually performed by means of a combination of several functions. In this way, it is possible to reduce the engine torque according to the requirements by specifically suppressing injection pulses, retarding the ignition timing or closing the throttle device . The engine management systems receive the TCS request via signal or CAN data lines from the TCS control system. Use of ABS on motorcycles It has been possible to reduce the size and weight of car ABS systems substantially in recent years. As a result, volume production ABS systems are now a very attractive option for motorcycles. Consequently, this class of vehicle will also be able to benefit from the advantages of ABS as a safety system.
Other system variants have arisen from : the demand for combined brake systems , i.e., systems in which both the front and rear brakes can be operated either by a foot pedal or a hand operated lever, possibly in combination with a separate means of actuating the front brakes. This type of special case requires a 3 channel hydraulic unit. However, the CBS variant is very model specific in design.
ABS/TCS systems for commercial vehicles In an ABS or ABS/TCS system for commercial vehicles, depending on the vehicle configuration and the number of axles, four or six wheel speed sensors, up to three to six pressure control valves, and in the case of a TCS system one TCS valve are used .
                             UFB0334 2Y, UFB0333 2Y, UFB0332 1Y
one after the other is then controlled : jointly by a single pressure control valve. In multi axle vehicles where the axles are further apart, such as articulated buses for example, three axle control is used out of preference.
In light commercial vehicles with pneumatic hydraulic converters, ABS intervenes in the pneumatic brake circuit via pressure control valves and defines the hydraulic braking pressure.
When the vehicle is running on a low friction coefficient road surface, the operation of an additional retarding brake  can lead to excessive slip at the driven wheels. This would impair vehicle stability. ABS therefore also monitors brake slip here and controls it to permissible levels by switching the retarder on and off.
In addition, there is an ABS system independent of the tractor vehicle in the trailer, which in turn consists of two or four wheel speed sensors and an mechatronic pressure control module with integrated electronics.
Components Wheel speed sensors Wheel speed sensors Virtually exclusively passive speed sensors in accordance with the inductive measuring principle have hitherto been used in the commercial vehicle sector. Owing to the principles involved, these sensors can only sense speeds greater than 0 km/h, which means that unlike active sensors, which can also detect a stationary sensor wheel stationary detection is not possible.
Pressure control valve Pressure control valve The pressure control valves are located between the service brake valve and the brake cylinders, and control the brake pressure of one or more wheels . If no pilot valve actuation takes place, "pressure rise" is the result.
1 Wheel speed sensor with sensor ring, 2 Brake cylinder, 3 ABS pressure control valve,  4 ABS warning lamp, 5 TCS lamp, 6 TCS switch, 7 Service brake valve, 8 ABS/TCS ECU,  9 TCS valve, 10 Shuttle valve, 11 Spring type brake cylinder, 12 Compressed air reservoir, circuit 1, 13 Compressed air reservoir, circuit 2. UFA0031 1Y 8 3 3 3 3 9 10 2 1 11 12 13 1 11 1 2 1 4 5 6 7
flows through the pressure control valves unhindered in both directions when pressure is applied to or vented from the brake cylinders. This ensures fault free functioning of the service brake system.
TCS valve TCS valve Usually a directly controlled TCS solenoid valve designed as a 2/2 way directional control valve in combination with a pneumatic shuttle valve is provided for the driver independent pressure rise for the TCS brake controller . In the event of a brake intervention the supply pressure is applied via the electrically actuated TCS solenoid valve and the shuttle valve to the ABS pressure control valves, whereby the shuttle valve blocks the connection to the service brake valve according to select high. At the same time, on the non active side, the holding magnet of the ABS pressure control valve is actuated to prevent the pressure rise in the associated wheel brake cylinder. The brake pressure can now be controlled according to the desired wheel speed with the ABS pressure control valve on the active side.
engines via electronic diesel control . The engine management system receives the corresponding signal via a CAN data bus from the ABS/TCS ECU.
1 Connection for energy input, 2 Connection for energy output, 3 Venting, 4 Diaphragm,  5 Inlet, 6 Valve seat, 7 Solenoid valve for pressure holding valve, 8 Valve seat, 9 Valve seat, 10 Diaphragm, 11 Outlet, 12 Solenoid valve for outlet valve, 13 Valve seat, 14 Service brake valve, 15 ABS/TCS ECU, 16 Pressure control valve, 17 Wheel brake. 3 15 14 1 17 2 16 9 10 11 12 13 4 5 6 7 8 UFA0032 1Y
Function: Human error is the cause of a large portion of road accidents. Even under normal driving conditions, a driver and his vehicle can reach their physical operating limits on account of, for example, an unexpected bend in the road, a suddenly appearing obstacle or an unanticipated change in the condition of the road surface. Increased speed can also result in the driver not being able to control his vehicle safely, since the lateral acceleration forces acting on the vehicle in such a situation reach levels which make excessive demands on him.
If the tires' coefficients of friction are exceeded, the vehicle will suddenly behave differently from what the driver with his driving experience expects. In such situations of operating limits, the driver is often no longer able to stabilize the vehicle himself; as a rule, he will intensify the instability through reactions arising from fear and panic. As a result, a significant discrepancy is built up between the longitudinal motion of the vehicle and the longitudinal axis of the vehicle . Even by steering in the opposite direction, a normal driver will barely be able to restabilize his vehicle on his own at float angles in excess of 8deg.
Driving dynamics control is known by different names the Electronic Stability Program .
with driving dynamics control 1 Driver steers, lateral force buildup, 2 Impending instability, ESC intervention, front right, 3 Car remains under control, 4 Renewed incipient instability due to excessive  countersteering by the driver, ESC intervention at front left,  complete stabilization.
MG Yaw moment, FR Wheel forces in transverse direction, b  Float angle ,     Brake intervention by ESC.
cle does not swerve outwards with its rear : end , but instead follows the driver's steering input as far as is physically possible.
ESC is based on ABS and TCS components. In this way, the individual wheels can be actively braked with high dynamic response. The engine torque and thus the traction slip values at the wheels can be influenced by means of the engine management system. The systems communicate via, for example, the CAN bus.
Requirements Driving dynamics control contributes to increasing driving safety. It improves vehicle behavior up to the physical operating limits. The vehicle's reaction remains foreseeable to the driver and can thus be better controlled even in critical driving situations.
At the vehicle's physical driving limits, vehicle and directional stability are enhanced in all operating states, such as full braking, partial braking, coasting, accelerating, overrunning and load changes, and also for example in the case of extreme steering maneuvers . The risk of skidding is drastically reduced.
In a variety of different situations, further improvements are obtained in the exploitation of traction potential when ABS and TCS come into action, and when engine drag torque control is active . This leads to shorter braking distances and greater traction with enhanced stability and higher levels of steering response. Incorrect system interventions could have an impact on safety. A comprehensive safety concept ensures that all faults that are not essentially avoidable are detected in time and the ESC system is shut down fully or partially depending on the type of fault.
Numerous studies . Other new cars were subject to a transition period which must be complied with by the end of 2014. Other regions such as Japan and Australia for example will also be introducing or have already introduced such a control system.
ay Fx Fy FN L MBrNom MDifNom MEngNom MMWhlNom MRedNom MZ pWhl pAdm r uch uDif uDifNom uMWhl uMWhlNom uWhl ux uy a b d l li Nom lDifTolNom lNom u ps. ps.Nom Measured vehicle lateral acceleration Tire force in longitudinal direction Tire force in lateral direction  Setpoint slip change Coefficient of friction Yaw velocity Nominal yaw velocity
Operating principle: Driving dynamics control is a system which uses a vehicle's brake system and drivetrain to deliberately influence the vehicle's longitudinal and lateral motion in critical situations. When the stability control function assumes operation, it shifts the priorities that govern the brake system. The basic function of the wheel brakes to decelerate and/or stop the vehicle assumes secondary importance as ESC intervenes to keep the vehicle stable and on course. ESC can also accelerate the drive wheels by means of engine interventions to contribute to the vehicle's stability.
Both mechanisms act on the vehicle's intrinsic motion. During steady state circular course driving, there is a defined connection between the driver's steering input and the resulting vehicle lateral acceleration and thus the tire forces in the lateral direction . The forces acting on a tire in the longitudinal and lateral directions are dependent on the tire slip. It follows from this that the vehicle's intrinsic motion can be influenced by the tire slip. The specific braking of individual wheels, e. g. of the rear wheel on the inside of the bend in the case of understeering or of the front wheel on the outside of the bend in the case of oversteering, helps the vehicle to remain on the course determined by the steering angle as precisely as possible.
Typical driving maneuver To compare how a vehicle handles at its operating limits with and without ESC, the following example is given. The driving maneuver reflects actual operating conditions, and is based on simulation programs designed using data from vehicle testing. The results have been confirmed in subsequent road tests.
driver braking and at an initial speed of 144 km/h. Figure 3 shows the curves for dynamic response parameters. Initially, as they approach the S bend, the conditions for both vehicles, and their reactions, are identical. Then come the first steering inputs from the drivers .
Vehicle without ESC Vehicle without ESC As can be seen, in the period following the initial, abrupt steering input the vehicle without ESC is already threatening to become unstable .
Phase 4: Vehicle without ESC  is no longer under control;  Vehicle with ESC  fully stabilized by  ESC intervention  at front right.
movement around its vertical axis .
Vehicle with ESC Vehicle with ESC The vehicle with ESC is stabilized after the initial steering input by active braking of the front left wheel to counter the threat of instability . In Phase 4, a second brief brake application this time at the right front wheel restores complete stability. The vehicle remains on the course defined by the steering wheel angle.
Structure of the  overall system Objective of driving dynamics control The control of the handling characteristics at the vehicle's physical driving limits is intended to keep the vehicle's three degrees of freedom in the plane of the road linear velocity ux, lateral velocity uy and yaw velocity ps. about the vertical axis within the controllable limits. Assuming appropriate operator inputs, driver demand is translated into dynamic vehicular response that is adapted to the characteristics of the road in an optimization process designed to ensure maximum safety.
System and control structure The ESC system comprises the vehicle as a controlled system, the sensors for determining the controller input variables, the actuators for influencing the braking, motive and lateral forces, as well as the hierarchically structured controller, comprising a higher level transverse dynamics controller and lower level wheel controllers .
In order to determine the nominal behavior, the signals defining driver command are evaluated. These comprise the signals from the steering wheel angle sensor . The calculation of the nominal behavior also takes into account the utilized friction coefficient potential and the vehicle speed. These are calculated in the observer from the signals sent by the wheel speed sensors, the lateral acceleration sensor, the yaw sensor, and the brake pressure sensor. Depending on the control deviation, the yaw moment, which is necessary to make the actual state variables approach the desired state variables, is then calculated.
In order to generate the required yaw mo : ment, it is necessary for the changes in desired braking torque and slip at the wheels to be determined by the transverse dynamics controller. These are then set by means of the lower level brake slip and traction controllers together with the brake hydraulics actuator and the enginemanagement actuator.
Driving condition estimation To determine the stabilization interventions, not only knowledge of the signals from the sensors for wheel speeds uWhl, admission pressure pAdm, yaw rate , the vehicle linear velocity ux, the tire slip values li, the slip angle a on one axle, the float angle b, the vehicle lateral velocity uy, and the coefficient of friction m. They are estimated on a model supported basis from the sensor signals in the observer.
1 Wheel speed sensors, 2 Brake pressure sensor with mounted ECU,  6 Wheel brakes, 7 Engine ECU.
1 1 1 1 5 3 4 6 6 6 6 R 7 2 TCS controller Tire forces, a ABS controller i i Nom Nom Estimation of road condition .
Driver command Wheel controller Transverse dynamics controller MBrNom y a y d a D l psb d, u l a b ps   b Nom x MEng MRedNom D Nom i p Nom MBrake , , , m ps  , , ,...
wheels on the inside of the bend follow a : different course from the wheels on the outside of the bend, and consequently rotate at a different speed.
Vehicle handling changes during normal use in response to varying load, altered tractive resistance .
Under all these boundary conditions, the vehicle linear velocity must be estimated with a deviation of a few % in order to ensure the enabling and intensity of stabilization interventions to the necessary extent.
Basic transverse dynamics controller The function of the transverse dynamics controller is to calculate the actual behavior of the vehicle from, for example, the yaw velocity signal and the float angle estimated in the observer, and to bring the driving behavior in the driving dynamic limit range into line with behavior in the normal range as closely as possible .
___ uch ) 2  as the basis for calculating the vehicle nominal motion. In this formula, l denotes the distance between the front and rear axles. Geometric and physical parameters of the vehicle model are summarized in the "characteristic vehicle speed" uch. The variable ps. is then limited according to the current friction coefficient conditions and to the special properties of the vehicle dynamics and the driving situation . The driver command is thus known as the nominal yaw velocity ps. Nom.
The transverse dynamics controller compares the measured yaw velocity with the associated setpoint value and in the event of significant deviations calculates the yaw moment that is required to match the actual state variable to its setpoint state. At a higher level, the float angle b is monitored and, as the values rise, increasingly taken into consideration in the calculation of the stabilizing yaw moment Mz. This controller output variable is applied by means of braking torque and slip inputs to the individual wheels which must be adjusted by the lower level wheel controllers.
Stabilization interventions are performed at the wheels, the braking of which generates a yaw moment in the required direction of rotation and at which the limit of the transmittable forces has not yet been reached. For an oversteering vehicle, the physical limit is first exceeded on the rear axle. Stabilization interventions are therefore performed via the front axle. For an understeering vehicle, the situation is reversed .
The nominal slip values requested by the transverse dynamics controller li Nom at individual wheels are set with the aid of lower level wheel controllers . A distinction is made between the following three application cases.
Wheel control in the coasting case Wheel control in the coasting case In order to exert as accurately as possible the yaw moments required to stabilize the vehicle, the wheel forces must be altered under defined conditions by controlling the wheel slip. The nominal slip requested by the transverse dynamics controller at a wheel is adjusted in the unbraked case by the lower level brake slip controller by way of an active pressure build up. The current slip at the wheel must be known as precisely as possible for this purpose. This is calculated from the measured wheelspeed signal and the vehicle linear velocity determined in the observer ux. The nominal braking torque at the wheel is formed from the deviation of the actual wheel slip from its setpoint value using a PID control law.
brake slip. Following downshifts and when : the accelerator is suddenly released, inertia in the engine's moving parts exerts a degree of braking force at the drive wheels. Once this force and the corresponding reactive torque rise beyond a certain level, the tires will lose their ability to transfer the resulting loads to the road and will tend to lock . The brake slip for the driven wheels can be limited in the coasting case by engine drag torque control. This acts like "gentle acceleration" by the driver.
These three requirements must be coordinated in such a way that the driver's deceleration and steering inputs are implemented as much as possible. If wheel control is performed primarily with the objective of maximum vehicle deceleration, it can be performed on the basis of wheel acceleration which can be robustly determined with minimal sensor information . In order to specifically adjust the longitudinal and lateral tire forces to stabilize the vehicle, the principle of slip control must be applied because it also permits wheel control in the unstable range of the frictioncoefficient/slip characteristic. From the available sensor information, however, it must be possible to determine the absolute wheel slip to a few %, depending on the vehicle speed.
The function of the ABS controller is to ensure vehicle stability and steerability in all road conditions and in so doing exploit as much as possible the friction between wheels and road. It does this also in its capacity as the lower level controller to the transverse dynamics controller by modulating the brake pressure at the wheel in such a way that the maximum possible longitudinal force can be exerted while maintaining sufficient lateral stability. However, more variables are measured in ESC than in a pure ABS configuration, which only contains the wheel speed sensors. Thus, individual vehicle motion information, such as for example yaw rate or lateral acceleration, is available through direct measurement of greater accuracy than is the case with model supported estimation of the basis of few measured values.
of inertia about the vertical axis. ABS features yaw moment build up delay to hold back the pressure rise at the front wheel with the higher coefficient of friction at the road surface and thereby react even better to the actual vehicle motion.
If, when braking in a bend, the vehicle starts to turn under certain conditions, the oversteer tendency can be counteracted by means of electronic braking force distribution through pressure reduction in individual wheels. If this is not sufficient on its own, the transverse dynamics controller helps by actively building up pressure at the front wheel on the outside of the bend and decreased slightly at the front on the outside.
If the vehicle starts to oversteer during a : fully or partially braked lane change, the pressure at the rear wheel on the inside of the bend is specifically decreased and decreased slightly at the front on the outside.
Wheel control in the drive case Wheel control in the drive case The lower level traction controller is activated as soon as the drive wheels start to spin in the drive case. The measured wheel speed and the respective drive slip can be influenced by changing the torque balance at each drive wheel. The TCS controller limits the drive torque at each drive wheel to the drive torque that can be transferred there to the road. In this way, the driver command is implemented after acceleration as well as is physically possible and, at the same time, fundamental directional stability is ensured, since the lateral forces at the wheel are not too greatly reduced.
Whl uR Whl between the measured wheel speed of the left wheel uL Whl and the right wheel uR Whl are used as controlled variables.
Braking torque interventions at the drive wheels Reference variables from the transverse dynamics controller Engine intervention D MRedNom MMWhlNom MDifNom MEngNom MBrNom , D DifTolNom Nom l D l , , uMWhlNom uDifNom uMWhl uMWhlNom u uDifNom Dif Computation of setpoint values Determination of operating state Torque distribution to actuators PI axle differential lock controller PID wheel speed controller UFA0071 2E
The dynamic response of the drivetrain depends on the highly differing operating states. It is therefore necessary to determine the current operating status in order to be able to adapt the controller parameters to the controlled system's dynamic response and to nonlinearities.
Because the mean wheel speed is affected by variable inertial forces originating from the drivetrain as a whole can vary over a wide range. In the stationary case, the I component is a measure for the torque which can be transferred to the road surface. The output variables of this controller is the setpoint sum torque MMWhlNom.
In contrast, the time constant for the wheel speed differential is relatively small, reflecting the fact that the wheels' own inertial forces are virtually the sole determining factor for their dynamic response. Furthermore, in contrast to the mean wheel speed, it is influenced only indirectly by the engine. The wheel speed differential uDif is controlled by a nonlinear PI controller. Because brake interventions at a drive wheel initially only become noticeable through the torque balance of this wheel, they change the distribution ratio of axle differential and thereby emulate a differential lock. The controller parameters of this axle differential lock controller are only dependent on the engaged gear and engine influences to a minimal extent. If the differential speed on the driven axle deviates more than currently permissible  from its setpoint value uDifNom, calculation of a setpoint differential torque MDifNom starts. The dead zone is widened if TCS brake interventions are to be avoided, for example when cornering at the operating limits.
Setpoint sum and setpoint differential torques are the basis for distributing the positioning forces to the actuators. The setpoint differential torque MDifNom is set by the braking torque difference between the left and right drive wheels by means of corresponding valve actuation in the hydraulic unit . The setpoint sum torque MMWhlNom is adjusted by both the engine interventions and a symmetrical brake intervention.
With a gasoline engine, adjustments undertaken through the throttle valve are relatively slow to take effect reduces the engine torque by modifying the quantity of fuel injected. Symmetrical brake intervention can be applied for brief transitional support of engine torque reduction.
Traction plays a special role in off road applications. Normally, in vehicles with offroad requirements, traction control is automatically adapted by way of special situation identification in order to achieve the best levels of performance and robustness possible. Other vehicle manufacturers give the driver the opportunity to choose different adjustments from deactivation of engine torque limitation through to adaptations tailored to special road conditions .
Supplementary transverse dynamics functions The basic ESC functions described above can also feature supplementary driving dynamics functions for special vehicle categories, such as sport utility vehicles and small vans for example, and for special vehicle stabilization requirements.
Enhanced understeering control Enhanced understeering control It is possible even in normal driving conditions for the vehicle to fail to comply adequately with the driver's steering input
 if, for example, the road : surface in a bend is suddenly wet or contaminated. ESC can therefore increase the yaw rate by exerting an additional yaw moment. This enables the vehicle to negotiate a bend at the maximum speed physically possible. The expected frequency of interventions and the comfort requirements of the vehicle manufacturer differ from vehicle type to vehicle type, and there are accordingly different expansion stages for executing such brake interventions which influence the vehicle's understeering behavior.
In order to ensure a desired track course, the vehicle is then without a yaw moment being applied braked as far as necessary by specific braking of all the wheels .
Rollover prevention Rollover prevention In particular, light commercial vehicles and other vehicles with a high center of gravity, such as sport utility vehicles .
There are special functions , a predictive process is used to estimate the vehicle's behavior in the near future. The two wheels on the outside of the bend, in particular, are braked if an imminent danger of overturning is identified. This action reduces the lateral forces on the wheels and thereby reduces the critical lateral acceleration. Particularly in the event of highly dynamic evasive maneuvers, wheel control must be effected with such high levels of sensitivity that, in spite of the wildly fluctuating vertical forces FN, vehicle steerability is not diminished by the tendency of individual wheels to lock. The reduction of wheel speed by individual wheel braking also ensures that the driver is able to keep the vehicle in lane. In quasi stationary driving situations, punctual reduction of the engine torque also prevents the driver from provoking a critical situation.
The moment of intervention and the intensity of the stabilizing interventions must be adapted as accurately as possible to the current vehicle behavior. This behavior can change significantly with the load, for example in the case of vans or sport utility vehicles fitted with roof racks. Such vehicles therefore make use of additional estimation algorithms which calculate the vehicle mass and the change in the center of mass caused by load distribution, if this is required to adapt the ESC functions .
Trailer sway mitigation Trailer sway mitigation Depending on the vehicle speed, combinations of towing vehicle and trailer are prone to swaying about their vertical axis. If the vehicle is traveling at a slower speed than the "critical speed" , these swaying motions are adequately damped and are quick to die down. If, however, the combination is traveling at a higher speed, small steering movements, crosswinds or driving over a pothole can suddenly induce such swaying motions, which then quickly intensify and can ultimately cause an accident due to the combination jackknifing.
Clear periodic oversteering triggers nor : mal ESC stabilization interventions, but these normally arrive too late and on their own are not sufficient to stabilize the combination. The Trailer Sway Mitigation  function identifies swaying motions in good time on the basis of the customary ESC sensors; it does this by model based analysis of the towing vehicle's yaw rate while taking into account the driver's steering movements. When these swaying motions reach a critical level, the combination is automatically braked in order to reduce the speed to such an extent that not even the smallest subsequent excitation will cause an immediate critical oscillation again. In order to damp the oscillation as effectively as possible in a critical situation, in addition to symmetrical deceleration through all the towing vehicle's wheels, individual wheel interventions are performed which swiftly damp the swaying motion of the combination. Limitation of the engine torque prevents dangerous acceleration by the driver during the stabilization process.
Activation of further driving dynamics Activation of further driving dynamics actuators actuators In addition to utilization of the hydraulic wheel brakes, other actuators are provided by means of which the driving dynamic properties of a vehicle can be specifically influenced. When active steering and chassis systems are linked with ESC to form the composite system known as Vehicle Dynamics Management .
1 Engine with transmission, 2 Wheel, 3 Wheel brake, 4 Axle differential, 5 Central differential, 6 ECU with enhanced ESC function, 7 Axle differential.
u  Wheel speed, uMWhl Mean wheel speed, MMWhl Driving sum torque, MBr Braking torque, FA Front axle RA Rear axle R Right, L Left, F Front, R Rear, FA Front axle, RA Rear axle.
RL Engine interventions RR FL FR , MBr, FR MMWhl, FA uMWhl, FA , MMWhl uMWhl , MMWhl, RA uMWhl, RA MBr, RR MBr, FL MBr, RL 1 A B 3 6 2 5 4 7 UFB0760 2E
In all wheel drive vehicles, the drive torque : is distributed via a central element to both powered axles , drive torque is limited when one axle demonstrates increased slip. In the most unfavorable case, propulsion cannot be achieved if a wheel spins. In combination with ESC, symmetrical brake interventions by the allwheel TCS controller can limit the differential speed between the axles and thereby achieve a longitudinal locking action. The traction control of ESC can also be matched to the special operating concept of other types of central elements such as Torsen and viscous couplings. Basically, all the controllable drivetrain actuators must demonstrate a defined locking moment and dynamic response when opening and closing in order to specifically adapt the vehicle's self steering properties with them.
If the drivetrain of a vehicle can be manually switched over between different configurations, ESC can be automatically adjusted to the operating mode selected by the driver. Because ESC is based on individual wheel control, cooperation with mechanical differential locks for specific offroad conditions is only possible if the differential lock can be automatically opened during interventions by the transverse dynamics controller. The system must otherwise be switched to an ABS fallback level when the lock is engaged, because driving dynamics interventions at one wheel would also affect other wheels if the axles were rigidly linked.
In addition to simple links between the two axles, there are controllable central locks in which an electric or hydraulic actuator activates a coupling and thereby adapts the locking moment .
The example in Figure 7 shows how variable drive torque distribution influences the vehicle behavior. If, in the event of a risk of oversteering in a bend, provisionally more drive torque can be shifted to the front axle, it is necessary only much later to avoid instability, to lower the engine torque or even stabilize the vehicle with brake interventions . If a vehicle tends to understeer, this tendency can be lessened by shifting drive torque to the rear axle. In both cases, vehicle behavior with improved response and better stability is achieved. The limits within which shifting the drive torque is actually possible are dependent on the concrete drivetrain configuration.
distribution on vehicle behavior a) Oversteer: Stability limit is first exceeded on the rear axle, b) Understeer: Stability limit is first exceeded on the front axle.
1 Standard distribution during stable driving, 2 Incipient instability, drive torque is shifted to the axle which still has stability potential, 3 Maximum shift of drive torque, 4 Withdrawal of shift, 5 Standard distribution is re established  after instability has been reduced.
1 2 3 a 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 25% 75% 75% 25% 25% 75% 75% 25% 100% 100% b 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 UAF0116 1Y
A controllable element on one axle can : be activated by ESC along similar lines to the flexible linking of the two axles described. In terms of basic operation, the Dynamic Wheel Torque Distribution  function barely differs from the axle differential lock effected by TCS via the hydraulic wheel brakes. However, such a supplementary actuator also actively distributes the drive torque between the wheels on one axle in normal situations. This is done with minimal losses and which much greater sensitivity and comfort than can be achieved by traction control in combination with brakingtorque control and engine torque reduction while taking into account the wear of the ESC hydraulic unit.
System components The hydraulic unit, the ECU directly connected to it and the speed sensors are suitable for the rugged ambient conditions that are encountered in the engine compartment or the wheel arches. The yaw sensor and the lateral acceleration sensor are either integrated into the ECU or like the steering angle sensor installed in the passenger cell. Figure 8 shows by way of example the installation locations of the components in the vehicle with the electrical and mechanical connections.
Electronic control unit for communicating with other systems, such as engine and transmission management for example.
1 Wheel brakes, 2 Wheel speed sensors, 3 Engine ECU, 4 Electronically activated throttle valve, 5 Steering angle sensor, 6 Brake booster with brake master cylinder, 7 Hydraulic unit with add on ECU, 8 Yaw sensor with integrated  lateral acceleration sensor.
Hydraulic unit: The hydraulic unit .
ESC systems require twelve valves irrespective of the brake circuit configuration using ESC hydraulics in the same way as described for the ABS system.
But because ESC systems must also actively build up pressure , the return pump used for ABS is replaced by a selfpriming pump for each circuit. The wheelbrake cylinders and the brake master cylinder are connected via a changeover valve open at zero current and a highpressure switching valve.
An additional non return valve with a specific closing pressure prevents the pump from drawing unwanted brake fluid from the wheels. These pumps are driven by a DC motor based on demand. The motor drives an eccentric bearing located on the shaft of the motor.
MC Brake master cylinder, WC Wheel brake cylinder, IV Inlet valve, OV Outlet valve, SV Switchover valve, HSV High pressure switching valve, RP Return pump, M Pump motor, AC Low pressure reservoir, F Front, R Rear, R Right, L Left.
RL WC WC WC WC IV IV HSV SV RP AC OV OV FR FL RR Brake circuit 1 Brake circuit 2 MC M p U UFB0752 3E
remain closed. To reduce the pressure, : the outlet valves are opened and the highpressure switching valves and switchover valves return to their original position  is opened. The two pumps then generate additional pressure in order to stabilize the vehicle. When the intervention is finished, the outlet valve is opened and the pressure in the controlled wheel discharged to the reservoir. As soon as the driver releases the brake pedal, the fluid is pumped from the reservoir back to the brake fluid reservoir.
Monitoring system A comprehensive safety monitoring system is of fundamental importance for reliable ESC functioning. The system used encompasses the complete system together with all components and all their functional interactions. The safety system is based on safety methods such as, for example, FMEA  and error simulation studies. From these, measures are derived for avoiding errors which could have safety related consequences. Extensive monitoring programs guarantee the reliable and punctual detection of all sensor errors which cannot be prevented completely. These programs are based on the well proven safety software from the ABS and TCS systems which monitor all the components connected to the ECU together with their electrical connections, signals, and functions. The safety software was further improved by utilizing the possibilities offered by the additional sensors, and by adapting them to the special ESC components and functions.
in the ESC hydraulic unit a) Pressure build up when braking, b) Pressure reduction with ABS control, c) Pressure build up via self priming pump due to TCS or ESC intervention.
IV Inlet valve, OV Outlet valve, SV Switchover valve, HSV High pressure switching valve, RP Return pump, M Pump motor, AC Low pressure reservoir, F Front, R Rear, R Right, L Left.
UFB0782 2Y RL a b c FR RL FR RL FR IV IV HSV SV RP AC OV OV IV IV HSV SV RP AC OV OV IV IV HSV SV RP AC OV OV M M M pU pU pU
second stage, the most important sensors : are tested individually. The yaw rate sensor is tested by intentionally detuning the sensor element and then evaluating the signal response. Even the acceleration sensor has internal background monitoring. When activated, the pressure sensor signal must show a predefined characteristic, and the offset and amplification are compensated for internally. The steeringangle sensor has its own integrated monitoring functions and directly delivers a message to the ECU in the event of error. In addition, the digital signal transmission to the ECU is permanently monitored. In a third stage, analytical redundancy is applied to monitor the sensors during the steady state operation of the vehicle. Here, a vehicle model is used to check that the relationships between the sensor signals, as determined by vehicle motion, are plausible. These models are also frequently applied to calculate and compensate for sensor offsets as long as they stay within the sensor specifications.
In case of error, the system is switched off either partially or completely depending on the type of error concerned. The system's response to errors also depends on whether the control is activated or not. Further names for driving dynamics control Aside from ESP.
Special driving dynamics control system for commercial vehicles Function Heavy commercial vehicles essentially differ from passenger cars in their much greater mass combined with higher centers of gravity and in additional degrees of freedom resulting from trailer operation . They can thus assume unstable states that extend far beyond the skidding familiar to passenger cars. Such states include, as well as the jackknifing of multiple stage vehicle combinations, caused for example by trailer sliding, overturning caused by high lateral acceleration. A vehicle dynamics control system for commercial vehicles must therefore, in addition to providing the stabilization functions familiar to passenger cars, also prevent jackknifing and overturning.
response of a vehicle combination at physical driving limits in all operating and laden states. This includes preventing jackknifing on vehicle combinations.
These requirements implemented in commercial vehicle ESC lead, as is the case with passenger cars, to a significant improvement in driving safety. For this reason, European law will from 2011 require the gradual introduction of a driving dynamics control system for heavy commercial vehicles .
kombi), e. g. combinations of rig, dolly and semitrailer or semitrailer unit with additional center axle trailer or tractor unit with B link and semitrailer.
Operating principle Driving dynamics control for commercial vehicles can be divided according to requirements into the two function groups described in the following.
Stabilizing the vehicle in the event of Stabilizing the vehicle in the event of imminent skidding or imminent skidding or jackknifing jackknifing Directional stabilization of a commercial vehicle is initially performed according to the same principles as for a passenger car. The controller compares current vehicle motion with vehicle motion desired by the driver, taking into account physical driving limits. The physical model of motion in the horizontal plane for a single vehicle characterized by three degrees of freedom . "Online" adaptation of parameters is particularly important in commercial vehicles, because the variety of variants and loads is much greater than for passenger cars.
Parallel to this, ESC calculates current vehicle motion from the measured variables available for yaw rate and lateral acceleration plus the wheel speeds. A significant deviation between the current vehicle motion and the motion expected by the driver leads to a control fault that is transformed by the actual controller into a corrective nominal yaw moment.
The level of the nominal yaw moment for a commercial vehicle depends on the control fault, the current vehicle configuration to permanently identify the current vehicle mass.
On the basis of the current driving situation, the nominal yaw moment by braking individual or several wheels and of the trailer is transformed in a suitable manner. This is depicted by way of example in Figure 11a and in Figure 11b for a clearly defined oversteer and understeer situations respectively.
In addition to these clearly defined situations, there are other critical dynamic situations in which other wheels or wheel combinations are braked depending on the desired stabilization effect. Thus, for example in the case of sharper understeer, the entire vehicle is braked along similar lines to Enhanced Understeering Control in passenger cars.
Because of the high center of gravity of commercial vehicles, skidding and jackknifing by such vehicles primarily occur at low to medium coefficients of friction at which the tire static friction limit is already exceeded at an early stage. At high coefficients of friction, laden commercial vehicles, on account of their high center
Reducing the risk of overturning Reducing the risk of overturning The overturning limit .
The situation which causes a commercial vehicle to overturn is, aside from a relatively low overturning limit, an excessive cornering speed. ESC makes use of this scenario to reduce the probability of the vehicle overturning. As soon as the vehicle approaches the overturning limit, it is slowed down by reducing engine torque and, if necessary, also applying the brakes. The overturning limit is determined here depending on the load of the vehicle and the load distribution, whereby the laden state of the vehicle is estimated "online". Depending on each driving situation, the overturning limit that is determined is modified. Thus, the overturning limit in high speed dynamic situations , it is increased in order to prevent unnecessary and disruptive ESC intervention.
Determining the overturning limit is based on various assumptions regarding the height of the center of gravity and the dynamic response of the vehicle combination with a known axle load distribution. This covers the largest portion of the usual vehicle combinations.
A trailer wheel lifting on the inside of a bend is indicated by the trailer's electronically controlled braking system .
System design On the European market, the electronically controlled braking system ELB has come to the fore as the standard for brake control in heavy commercial vehicles. ESC is based on this system, extending it to include regulation of the driving dynamics. To do so, ESC uses the ELB capability of generating varying braking forces for each individual wheel independently of driver action.
The very different general conditions for commercial vehicle brake systems in North America mean that purely ABS or ABS/TCS systems are used as standard. An ESC based on ABS/TCS is therefore used for these and similar markets. Here, ESC uses the method already applied with TCS on the drive axle to generate braking force individually for each wheel independently of the driver by means of a TCS valve and the downstream ABS valves. In addition, for ABS based ESC, the driver brake command must be measured by means of pressure sensors, which would otherwise not be possible during an ESC intervention on account of the function of the TCS valve.
Sensor systems Sensor systems Like passengers cars, commercial vehicles use a combined yaw rate and lateralacceleration sensor and a steeringwheel angle sensor as driving dynamics sensors for ESC. Each of these sensors contains a microcontroller with a CAN interface for analyzing and safely transmitting the measured data.
The steering wheel angle sensor is usually mounted immediately below the steering wheel and it measures the angle of rotation of the steering wheel. This is then converted in the ECU into a wheel steering angle.
In order to pick up the lateral acceleration as close as possible to the center of gravity of the rig, the combined yaw rate and lateral acceleration sensor is usually mounted in the vicinity of the center of gravity.
Even though commercial vehicles essentially use the same sensors as passenger cars, the yaw rate and lateral acceleration sensor must have a much more robust design to cope with the rougher ambient conditions, particularly on the commercial vehicle frame.
Electronic control unit in the brake control unit. This control unit is constructed using conventional circuit board technology with correspondingly powerful microcontrollers.
A CAN bus connects the ESC sensors with the control unit. The nominal brake pressures and wheel slip values of the ESC are then implemented by the relevant braking system for each wheel and for the trailer. In addition, the braking system transmits the requested engine torque via the vehicle CAN bus to the engine ECU for implementation.
Moreover, relevant information is also transferred from the engine and retarder to the braking system via the vehicle CAN bus. Essentially, this involves current and requested engine torque and speed, retarder torque, vehicle speed, and information from various control switches and any trailer that may be coupled.
Safety and monitoring functions: The extensive possibilities for ESC intervention in the handling characteristics of the vehicle and vehicle combination require a comprehensive safety system to ensure proper system functioning. This extends not only to the basic ELB or ABS/ TCS system respectively, but also to the additional ESC components, including all sensors, ECUs and interfaces.
The monitoring functions used for ESC are essentially based on the functions used in passenger cars and are adapted to the characteristics of commercial vehicles. There is also mutual monitoring of the microcontrollers distributed in the overall system. This means that the brake control unit contains a main computer and a monitoring computer that mainly performs plausibility checks alongside minor functional tasks. Furthermore, the corresponding algorithms permanently check memory and other internal computer hardware components to detect any defects that occur at an early stage.
The occurrence of faults results, depending on the nature and significance of the fault, in the shutdown of individual function groups through to a complete switching to "backup mode", in which the brakes are controlled by purely pneumatic means . This ensures that incorrect sensor signals cannot cause implausible and possibly dangerous operating states in braking operations.
The occurrence of a fault is indicated to the driver by suitable means so that suitable action can be taken.
Furthermore, any faults that occur are assigned a time stamp in the control unit and stored in the fault memory. The workshop can evaluate these with the help of a suitable diagnosis system.
References References E. K. Liebemann, K. Meder, J. Schuh, G. Nenninger: Safety and Performance Enhancement: The Bosch Electronic Stability Control. SAE Paper Number 200421 0060.
 M. Mitschke, H. Wallentowitz: Dynamik der Kraftfahrzeuge. 4th Edition, SpringerVerlag, 2004.
Automatic brake system : operations The supplementary functions described here utilize except for the pneumatic mechanical brake assistant the driving dynamics control infrastructure. This comprises the sensors, the actuators and the ECU.
Pneumatic brake assistant Pneumatic brake assistant This system requires a modified brake booster which increases the level of amplification according to the rate of pedal movement and pedal force. This results in faster and greater buildup of pressure in the wheel brakes.
In an alternative version, the brake booster is extended to include an electronically activated valve. This enables an ECU to influence the pressure difference between the brake booster chambers and thus the boosting of the braking force. This provides better opportunities for optimizing the trigger threshold and response characteristics.
Hydraulic brake assistant Hydraulic brake assistant The hydraulic brake assistant operation uses the driving dynamics control hardware. A pressure sensor detects the driver's braking intention; the ECU analyzes the signal on the basis of the defined triggering criteria, and initiates an appropriate brake pressure build up in the hydraulic system. The upstream brake booster is a standard unit and does not require any modification.
As a general observation, it should be stated that it is an absolute requirement that all brake assistant system variants referred to are used in conjunction with an antilock braking system or a driving dynamics control system due to the actively generated rapid brake pressure rise beyond the wheel lock limit.
braking with and without brake assistant operations A longer braking distance is required without a brake assistant than with a brake assistant. 1 "Average driver", 2 Experienced driver, 3 "Average driver" with brake assistant. tv Delay time for braking results  in longer braking distance.
Automatic brake pressure increase : at the rear wheels This is a function which provides the driver with additional brake servo assistance for the rear wheels if the front wheels are controlled by the ABS system. This function was introduced because many drivers do not increase the pedal force at the start of ABS control even though the situation would require this. Once ABS control has been initiated on the front wheels, the wheel pressures at the wheels on the rear axle are increased by way of the return pump of the hydraulic modulator until these too have reached the lockup pressure level and ABS control is initiated . The brake application is therefore at the physical optimum. The pressure in the rear axle wheel brake cylinders can then exceed the pressure in the brake master cylinder, also during ABS control.
The cutoff condition is fulfilled when the wheels on the front axle are no longer under ABS control or when the pressure in the brake master cylinder falls below the cutoff threshold.
Automatic brake pressure increase with forceful pressing of brake pedal This function provides the driver with additional brake servo assistance. It is activated if the maximum possible vehicle deceleration is not achieved even if the driver forcefully presses the brake pedal to the point that would normally cause the lockup pressure to be reached . This is the case, for example, at high brake disk temperatures or if the brake pads have a considerably reduced coefficient of friction.
When this function is activated, the wheel pressures are increased until all wheels have reached the lockup pressure level and ABS control is initiated . The brake application is therefore at the physical optimum. The pressure in the wheel brake cylinders can then exceed the pressure in the brake master cylinder, also during ABS control.
If the driver reduces the desired level of braking to a value below a particular threshold value, the vehicle deceleration is reduced in accordance with the force applied to the brake pedal. The driver can therefore precisely modulate the vehicle deceleration when the braking situation has passed. The cutoff condition is fulfilled if the primary pressure or vehicle speed falls below the respective cutoff threshold. Brake disk wiper This function ensures that, in the event of rain or a wet road, the splash water is cyclically removed from the brake disks. This is achieved by automatically setting a low brake pressure at the wheel brakes. In this way, the function helps to ensure minimum brake response times when driving in wet conditions. Evaluated signals from the windshield wipers or rain sensor are used to detect wet conditions.
The pressure level is adjusted so that the vehicle deceleration cannot be perceived by the driver. Actuation is repeated at a defined interval for as long as the system detects rain or a wet road. If required, just the disks at the front axle can be wiped. The wiping procedure is terminated as soon as the driver applies the brakes.
increase 1 Brake pressure increase by brake booster, 2 Further brake force increase  by pedal force, 3 Brake pressure increase by drivingdynamics control hydraulic modulator, 4 ABS control range.
Automatic prefill: This function reduces the total braking distance in emergency situations whereby the driver operates the brake pedal immediately after the accelerator pedal is released. This is achieved by prefilling and thereby preloading the brake system after release of the accelerator pedal, which means that in the subsequent brake operation the pressure build up is considerably more dynamic. Accordingly, high vehicle deceleration sets in earlier.
Prefilling of the brake system is adjusted by the return pump of the hydraulic modulator. The brake shoes are then firmly applied to the brake disks. If there is no operation of the brake pedal directly after a rapid release of the accelerator, the pressure in the brake system is reduced again. This does not impair driveability. Electromechanical parking brake The electromechanical parking brake . As an option, it is also possible for the road gradient to be detected by a tilt sensor.
The parking brake is released by means of the same control knob. However, various safety regulations and requirements have to be met, e. g. to prevent inappropriate or inadvertent release of the parking brake by children or animals .
Controlled braking with  hydraulic modulator If the electromechanical parking brake is activated while driving, the vehicle must be safely decelerated to a stop. The brake pressure required for this is built up by the return pump of the hydraulic modulator. The driving dynamics control system ensures safe braking even on slippery or wet road surfaces. When the vehicle has come to a stop, the electromechanical parking brake assumes the function of keeping the vehicle stationary.
Brake light switch Initial pressure Hill hold control logic Driving dynamics control logic Safety logic Sensors ECU Wheel speed Engine torque and speed Clutch data CAN Hydraulic modulator Handbrake Accelerator Gear data CAN UFB0755 3E
Low speed traction control is based on the driving dynamics control hardware and additional sensors: a tilt sensor detects the road gradient, a gear switch detects whether the driver has shifted to reverse gear, and a clutch switch recognizes whether the driver has depressed the clutch pedal.
Automatic braking on hill descent hill descent control This system is a convenience function which assists the driver on offroad descents with gradients of approximately 8 to 50 % by automatically operating the brakes. The driver can then concentrate fully on steering the vehicle and is not distracted by the need to operate the brakes at the same time. The brake pedal does not have to be operated.
When this system is activated, e.g, by pressing a button or switch, a preset speed is maintained over the extent of the specified brake pressure. If required, the driver can vary the predetermined speed by pressing the brake and accelerator pedal or using the control buttons of a speed control system.
The system remains active until it is switched off by pressing the button or switch again, i. e. it is not automatically deactivated.
Automatic brake application  for driver assistance systems This function is an additional function for active brake application with adaptive cruise control . This is based on a hydraulic brake system and driving dynamics control.
The function receives a request to decelerate the vehicle by a desired amount . This is calculated by the upstream ACC system. Automatic brake intervention maintains vehicle deceleration by means of appropriate brake pressures which are adjusted with the aid of the hydraulic modulator.
of automatic brake application for ACC 1 Deceleration specified by ACC  , 2 Current deceleration, 3 Pressure in wheel brake cylinders.
Application: Motorcycle Stability Control , and wheelie control taking account of the current riding situation and the current road friction coefficient conditions.
The ABS riding dynamics control of a motorcycle is similar in some points to that of a passenger car . Therefore the riding dynamic particulars of two wheelers will be discussed especially in the following. Riding physics  of a two wheeler Maintaining equilibrium A two wheel vehicle is in a state of unstable equilibrium and is prone to falling over. When moving it is 100% dynamically stabilized by the gyroscopic forces of the turning wheels and via the castor offset. A moving two wheeler thus becomes stable from a certain speed.
Because a two wheeler can tilt about the longitudinal axis, it must maintain equilibrium. Figure 2 shows the equilibrium of forces between gravity and centrifugal force when cornering. In the case of a real tire the wheel contact point is laterally offset. As a result, more inclination through the angle l is required than for a very thin tire. The wider the tire, the greater the necessary inclination at the same speed and for the same curve radius.
force rights the motorcycle again. The : righting motion turns the front wheel back to the initial position. The castor offset on the front wheel brings about a similar effect. The distance between the point of intersection of the steering axis with the road and the wheel contact point is called the castor offset. When the lateral component of the wheel downforce increases, this results in a corresponding torque towards the inside of the curve on the steering . The stability of a two wheeler increases with the speed and the resulting increasing gyroscopic effects. Likewise, a greater castor offset provides for better straight ahead stability. To ride a stationary curve, the rider must apply a steering moment to the outside of the curve to compensate the steering moment caused by gyroscopic effects and castor offset. If the rider lets go of the handlebars, the two wheeler rights itself and rides straight ahead again.
This produces the decisive difference as the rider specifies the desired curve radius. In a passenger car the steering wheel is turned without greater consideration of the steering torque to the corresponding steering angle. In contrast, the rider on a two wheeler specifies the curve radius via the steering moment and the two wheeler adjusts the associated steering angle itself accordingly by means of self stabilization. Here the two wheeler and the steering angle alway oscillate about the position of equilibrium somewhat. In addition, as determined by the geometry, the self adjusting steering angle decreases as the inclination increases.
Inclination estimation Important riding dynamic variables of a two wheeler are the inclination ; this sensor unit enables changes in angle to be sensed quickly.
gravity and centrifugal force when cornering S Center of gravity, P Wheel contact point, FZ Centrifugal force, FN Gravity , a Inclination angle, l Angle to tire center plane.
must be filtered with a low pass filter to determine the angle precisely. This worsens the signal dynamics, but the value is long term stable for this.
calculation cycle. The direction vector obtained in this way has good dynamics because it follows the yaw rates without further filtering. However, measuring errors or disturbances are also added up. As a result, when considered over a longer period of time, the direction of the vector would deviate ever further from the real Earth's gravity.
Correcting the g vector from method 2 with that from method 1 combines the advantages of both methods. The resulting angles dynamically follow each change and are at the same time also long term stable.
Motorcycle ABS Many accidents resulting in serious injury could be avoided if the rider braked fully without decelerating prior to the collision. MSC was therefore developed with the objective of enabling the rider to perform drastic braking in every situation without resulting in an accident.
Function of ABS Just like in a passenger car, the antilock braking system is intended to stop the wheels from locking. On a motorcycle particular attention is paid to the front wheel because here the greatest braking force can be applied and at the same time the front wheel is crucial to riding stability. Usually the wheel slip is the most important variable for the ABS controller. However, the vehicle speed must be determined for this purpose. This poses a particular challenge when it comes to two wheelers. Thus, for example, the rear wheel is lifted up in the event of a "stoppie" in response to heavy braking with the result that the rear wheel speed no longer matches the driving speed. From the remaining front wheel speed the vehicle speed must simultaneously be estimated and the wheel slip calculated. Because both these variables can no longer be reliably determined in such a situation, motorcycle ABS uses as well as the slip additional indicators, such as for example wheel deceleration, to detect wheel instability.
Rear wheel lift up control A rider who brakes heavily on two wheels decelerates primarily with the front wheel. Due to the dynamic wheel load distribution in combination with a high center of gravity, the wheel load shifts sharply towards the front wheel often even resulting in the rear end lifting up. Rear wheel lift up control was developed to make stable braking possible. This function evaluates the slip and deceleration values of both wheels. If the rear wheel threatens to lift up while braking, the function adapts the pressure in the front wheel brake circuit to keep the rear wheel on the ground and avoid rollovers.
Using the progression of the rear wheel : speed, it is in fact possible to detect when the rear wheel has lifted up, however this process does not distinguish whether the wheel hovers just a few millimeters above the ground or whether a rollover is already imminent. Here the pitch angle and pitchrate information from the inertial sensor helps to detect the situation and intervene with optimal control.
Braking in a turn/curve Normal motorcycle ABS is optimized to as short a braking distance as possible during straight ahead riding. The high brake slip values necessary for this purpose could cause a side slip in a curve because the tire is no longer able to apply the side control force. If the tire slips, gravity from Figure 2 is predominant and the front wheel swings in due to the castor offset towards the inside of the curve, drastically increasing the angle between direction of travel and wheel. The resulting Friction between tire and road brakes the wheel to such an extent that it locks, even if the brake pressure were reduced in this situation to 0 bar. A fall is virtually inevitable. It is therefore essential when cornering not to exceed the critical slip value. Steering moment under braking conditions A second critical point in any braking at an inclination on the front wheel is the steering moment under braking conditions. Because the tire when inclined in no longer centrally touching the road, a longitudinally acting braking force brings about a steering moment which turns the wheel towards the inside of the curve . The tighter curve radius allows the centrifugal force to increase and the motorcycle rights itself and ultimately rides a wider radius than at the start. If the rider fails to correct this already at the initial braking stage, the motorcycle may unintentionally stray onto the oncoming carriage way or leave the road.
Gradient control Both unintentionally high brake slip in a curve and a sudden jump in the steering moment under braking conditions can be effectively brought under control by an inclination dependent gradient control of the brake pressure. The slowly rising brake pressure gives the rider time to counteract the building steering moment under braking conditions. In addition, the slowing vehicle requires a certain righting moment because the motorcycle must be upright again at the latest when stationary. With more slowly increasing brake pressure the brake slip as well builds up under controllable conditions and does not overshoot the limit range.
A proficient rider starts with a low brake pressure when braking in a curve and then increases this with decreasing speed and inclination. Gradient control is optimally set in such a way that it is not perceived even by professional racing riders. Only in a drastic braking situation does it show its potential.
order to achieve an optimal combination : of stability and braking distance. Furthermore, high ABS brake pressure modulations must be avoided at an inclination on the front wheel because these could lead to dangerous handlebar vibrations due to the steering moment under braking conditions.
Electronically controlled braking force distribution To improve riding safety particularly for heavy motorcycles, Bosch has developed "ABS enhanced". This facilitates a combined braking system in the form of electronically controlled braking force distribution . Weighing just 1.5 kg and with a volume of 1.2 liters, it is the world's smallest and lightest ABS with eCBS.
Concept of the combined braking system Concept of the combined braking system With a combined braking system both wheels can be braked, even though the rider only applies the front or the rear brake . Using the measurement of the rider brake pressure and further parameters such as for example the speed, the system calculates the optimal braking force distribution in each braking situation. In phase 1 in Figure 5 the rider applies the brake, in phase 2 the nominal pressure on the other wheel is calculated according to the brake pressure specified by the rider, and in phase 3 brake pressure is finally built up on the other wheel by activating the valves.
This enables very short braking distances to be achieved without a loss of stability, even if the rider, for example when panic braking, is only braking with the rear wheel. Optimization of braking force distribution likewise reduces pitching and smooths abrupt vehicle movements, allowing the physical limits to be exploited to better effect. This makes "ABS enhanced" a safe and comfortable motorcycle braking system.
basic concept and purpose a) Electronic pressure build up at the front brake caliper, b) Electronic pressure build up at the rear brake caliper.
1a Rider applies rear brake, 1b Rider applies front brake, 2  the nominal pressure to the other wheel is calculated according to the rider brake pressure, 3a Brake pressure is built up at the front wheel by activating the valves and the pump, 3a Brake pressure is built up at the rear wheel by activating the valves and the pump. DFB0822 1Y
avoid the comfort problems familiar from : conventional systems when braking in a curve at low speed. Not least, in contrast to conventional systems, no additional hardware components are required the complete eCBS function is already featured in "ABS enhanced".
System design of the combined braking System design of the combined braking system system The combined braking system is available as a 2and a 3 channel version. In the 2 channel version there is a separate brake circuit for the front wheel and one for the rear wheel. Both are independent of one another. Thus, for example for the active build up of pressure at the front no brake fluid from the rear brake circuit is used and vice versa. In addition to the inlet .
The technical concept for the 2 channel system becomes apparent from Figure 6 : When the rider brakes at the rear, the target pressure at the front is calculated for optimal braking force distribution. For the active pressure build up the high pressure switching valve is opened and the suction pump delivers brake fluid. At the same time, energizing the changeover valve regulates its throughflow, which adjusts the desired pressure difference between master cylinder and brake caliper.
1 Brake handle, 2 Brake pedal, 3 Brake caliper 1 On front wheel, 4 Brake caliper 2 On front wheel,  5 Brake caliper on rear wheel, 6 Pressure sensors. IV Inlet valve, OV Outlet valve, HSV High pressure switching valve, SV Switchover valve, RP Return pump , M Pump motor, NRV Non return valve, Acc Accumulator volume. 1 2 3 4 5 6 6 HSV HSV USV USV M RFP RFP EV EV EV AV AV AV Acc Acc RV RV 6 6 DFB0818 1Y
at the front and then applies the rear brake, the combined braking system builds up additional brake pressure at the front. In this case the connection between the brake fluid reservoir and the brake line is already closed. The volume displacement required for the pressure build up leads to the brake handle being drawn in.
Although both effects also occur at the rear brake circuit, the influence there on braking comfort is less pronounced because the sensitivity at the pedal is lower. One way of solving the comfort problems of the 2 channel system is to equip the front brake with two calipers, with each being supplied by its own channel. The capacity for active pressure build up is only implemented for one of the two calipers. When the combined braking system builds up pressure on the front wheel when the brake pedal is pressed, one caliper remains depressurized. Figure 6 shows the associated hydraulic schematic of the 3 channel system.
ure 6, pressure is only actively built up at the left caliper of the front wheel, less brake fluid volume is needed to achieve a particular deceleration . As a result the handle reaction is reduced to an acceptable level.
Motorcycle Traction Control Traction control regulates traction slip at the driven wheel by reducing the drive torque. This can prevent the rear wheel from breaking away sideways in a curve and optimizes the transmission of traction force to the road surface. Because the radii, the contours, and the widths of motorcycle tires are different on the front and rear wheels, the effective tire rolling circumferences depend to varying degrees on the inclination. Consequently, knowledge of the inclination angle brings a decisive advantage when calculating the wheel slip values and in the performance capability of traction control.
Above all for Enduro motorcycles there is from slick through road tires right down to massive bar offroad tires a wide range of possible tire combinations which can be used on all manner of surfaces such as dry asphalt, cobblestone pavement, and sand. Therefore Motorcycle Traction Control permits for the most part a wide adjustment range for adaptation to meet demand.
Anti wheelie control Anti wheelie control controls the engine torque in such a way as to prevent the front wheel from lifting up in an uncontrolled manner and at the same time to guaranteed the maximum possible acceleration. Using the progression of the frontwheel speed, it is possible to detect when the front wheel has lifted up. However this process does not distinguish whether the wheel hovers just a few millimeters above the ground or whether a rollover is already imminent. Here the pitch angle and pitchrate information from the inertial sensor helps to detect the situation and intervene with optimal control.
Overview: In addition to the brakes and engine, as used by the driving dynamics control system .
Primary uses The functions are used primarily in the fields of directional stability, agility and reducing "driver workload", i. e. the efforts exerted by the driver to operate and control the vehicle.
Improving directional stability Improving directional stability In critical driving situations, these functions take on stabilization tasks which are normally performed by the driver himself. Typical examples are the oversteer situation or braking on roads with different grip factors on the left and right sides of the vehicle .
Increasing Increasing agility agility Some of these functions improve the acceleration response of the lateral dynamic response of the vehicle to steering inputs by the driver. These make the vehicle more agile, i. e. it responds more spontaneously and dynamically to driver inputs. Reducing the effort to control/operate  Reducing the effort to control/operate  the vehicle the vehicle An improved response by the vehicle to movements of the steering wheel and automatic stabilization interventions relieve the driver's workload, the steering effort in particular being reduced.
Functions Driving dynamic driver steering recommendation Function Function This function utilizes electrical power steering as the actuator. An additional, driving dynamically motivated steering torque is superimposed on the steeringservo torque of the power steering in order to provide the drive with a steering recommendation.
Limitation of supplementary  Limitation of supplementary  steering torque steering torque The driving dynamic supplementary steering torque is limited, depending on the vehicle, to values of approximately 3 Nm so that the driver can oversteer the steering recommendation at any time.
angle further, since the side force potential : on the front wheels is already exhausted and further steering may even reduce the side force.
Active steering stabilization  on the front axle Function Function This function intervenes via the anglesuperimposing steering actuator of the override steering directly in the vehicle movement. An additional steering angle adjusted by an electric motor is added to the driver's steering angle in an override gearbox.
Driving dynamics applications Driving dynamics applications The function operates, for example, in an oversteering driving situation. Yaw rate control with automatic steering angle intervention returns the excessively high yaw rate value to its setpoint value. During braking on roads with different grip factors, the function provides for compensation of the yaw motion. Since yaw compensation is automatically triggered and happens much faster than the steering operation of a typical driver, the measures in driving dynamics control for yawmoment build up delay can be reduced. The braking distance is also reduced.
Demands on the sensor system Demands on the sensor system Because of the high positioning rate of an override steering system, the sensor signals must be monitored with low fault latencies, i. e. a fault must be signaled quickly. This means that the inertial sensor system must have a redundant design.
Active steering stabilization  on the rear axle Function Function In vehicles with rear axle steering, the primary function controls the rear axle steering angle as a function of the steering wheel angle and the driving speed. At low speeds, the rear wheels are steered in the opposite direction to the front wheels, which improves vehicle maneuverability. At high speeds, the rear wheels are steered in the same direction as the front wheels. In this way, the yaw motion is less intensely excited during obstacle avoidance maneuvers. This increases directional stability considerably.
Driving dynamics applications Driving dynamics applications The associated functions act in situations similar to active front axle steering interventions. The effectiveness of oversteer interventions is crucially dependent on the current utilization of the side force potential on the rear wheels.
When braking on roads with different grip factors, it is necessary on account of the reduction of load on the rear axle to make interventions with larger angles in order to suppress the yaw motion. On the other hand, braking can take place without a considerable attitude angle.
Demands on the sensor system Demands on the sensor system The functions for rear axle steering likewise require a redundant inertial sensor system, since the positioning rate of a steering actuator on the rear axle is comparable with the override steering.
Torque distribution in the longitudinal direction for four wheel drives Function Function In vehicles with four wheel drive, interaxle differential locks or transfer cases within the framework of their basic function improve the traction and, with it, the accelerating performance of the vehicle, whereby the wheels of both axles transfer tractive forces.
Driving dynamics applications: Driving dynamics applications In situations where the grip factor is not fully utilized by traction, the self steering properties can be altered by shifting the tractive forces between the front and rear axles. The more tractive force an axle transfer, the more the side force potential on the wheels of this axle is weakened. Shifting the tractive force to the front axle increases the understeer tendency, while shifting it to the rear axle reduces the  understeer tendency. Through dynamic control of drive torque distribution, lateraldynamic agility can be increased without the vehicle tending towards oversteer. Wheel torque distribution  in the lateral direction Function Function Functions based on a "torque vectoring actuator" make a significant contribution to increasing agility. The actuator permits an extensively free shift of the wheel torque between the left and right wheels on an axle. In this way, the total turning force excluding friction losses is not reduced in the actuator meaning that this intervention is virtually neutral with regard to the driving speed.
Driving dynamics applications Driving dynamics applications In an understeering driving situation, the drive torque of the wheel on the outside of the curve is increased and the drive torque of the wheel on the inside of the curve is decreased. In this way, an additional yaw moment turning into the curve acts on the vehicle . The understeer tendency decreases; the vehicle's lateral dynamic agility increases. When accelerating on roads with different grip factors, the drive torque is specifically directed to the wheel with a high grip factor. Brake interventions by the traction control system on the wheel with a low grip factor are dispensed with to a large extent. This increases the mean acceleration on roads with different grip factors.
Even in an oversteering situation, the brake interventions are partly replaced by a wheel torque shift . In this way, the speed loss can be reduced by brake interventions of the driving dynamics control in the event of mild oversteer. In critical oversteering situations, the brakes still intervene, since in this case the speed loss is desired to alleviate the driving situation.
Replacement of wheel torque distribution by brake and  engine control interventions The understeer interventions by means of a torque vectoring actuator can be emulated by brake interventions on the wheels on the inside of the curve. The engine torque is increased to compensate the deceleration by the one sided brake intervention. This produces an effect similar to understeer intervention with a torquevectoring actuator. This only requires a hydraulic modulator with a long service life and low noise generation instead of an additional torque vectoring actuator.
Influencing self steering properties through roll stabilization Function Function In line with their comfort oriented basic function, systems for roll stabilization serve to compensate the rolling motion of the vehicle body when cornering.
Driving dynamics applications: Driving dynamics applications Where the roll stabilization system has a two channel design with separate activation of the actuators on the front and rear axles, there is an additional option for influencing the self steering properties. The roll compensating torques can within the framework of the performance of the individual channels be actively distributed between the front and rear axles. This results in a change of the wheel downforces.
extensively supported over the rear axle, the normal force at the rear on the wheel on the outside of the curve increases dramatically; the associated side force, however, increases only underproportionally. The side force on the rear axle is weakened, and the understeer tendency decreases. As a countermove, the understeer tendency increases when the rolling moment is extensively supported over the front axle.
Influencing self steering properties through variable vibration dampers Function Function The use of variable dampers for adaptive damping of the vertical movement of the vehicle body has become significantly widespread. Pitching and rolling motions which are caused by driver inputs such as braking and steering or by road surface defects, as well as vertical movements caused by road surface defects, can be noticeably reduced.
Driving dynamics applications Driving dynamics applications It is also possible with limited effect to influence the self steering properties. The action mechanism corresponds to influencing the self steering properties through roll stabilization. However, the function only has a transient effect during a rolling motion of the vehicle body, since a damper movement is a prerequisite for damping forces. The damping forces can be modulated by adjusting the damping hardness so that the wheel downforces can be semiactively distributed as described above. System architecture Allocation of functions to ECUs The actuators in the chassis and in the drivetrain are generally activated not only by functions of the integrated drivingdynamics control systems, but also first and foremost by basic functions which are very closely connected with the actuator. Examples of such basic functions include servo assist in an electrical power steering system or variable steering ratio in an override steering system.
The basic functions are characterized by moderate networking with other vehicle systems. Because of their close connection to the actuator, they are usually integrated into the associated ECU, which also activates and monitors the actuator. On the other hand, the functions of the integrated driving dynamics control systems are highly networked, in particular with driving dynamics control and other chassis control systems. They calculate a setpoint driving dynamic value for the actuator, which is transmitted via a data bus to the ECU. An arbitration with the setpoint values of the basic functions is performed in the ECU.
FA Front axle,  RA Rear axle, FW Front wheel,  RW Rear wheel, c i Inside of curve,  c o Outside of curve.       Centerline,       Forces without shifting,       Forces with shifting FN  through axle selective support  of the rolling moment.
Mean side force FA Mean side force RA Normal force Side force RW c o FW c o c o FW c i c i RW c i FN FN FN FN SAF0119 2E
The ECU for driving dynamics control : .
Interaction of various functions Various functions and actuators are increasingly being installed in a single vehicle. This calls into question a function structure which guarantees good interaction of the individual functions and which above all prevents mutual interference. The original trend observed of implementing a separate controller for each actuator is reaching its limits. However, fully bringing together all the algorithms in a central controller limits flexibility in the distributed development and in the use of ECU resources.
A more promising compromise is bringing together all the controllers which utilize a related positioning principle, since interventions with a related positioning principle require particularly intensive coordination.
The driving dynamic steering torque recommendation plays a special role. It must be matched in terms of its effect on the driver with functions for override steering. ________________________________ References References Isermann : Fahrdynamikregelung  Modellbildung, Fahrerassistenzsysteme, Mechatronik. Vieweg Verlag, Wiesbaden, 2006.
 Deiss, Knoop, Krimmel, Liebemann, Schroder: Zusammenwirken aktiver Fahrwerk und Triebstrangsysteme zur Verbesserung der Fahrdynamik. 15th Aachen Colloquium Automotive and Engine Technology, Aachen 2006, PP. 1671...1682.
 Erban, Knoop, Flehmig: Dynamic Wheel Torque Control DWT. Agility enhancement by networking of ESC and torque vectoring. 8th European All wheel Congress, Graz 2007, PP. 17.1...17.10.
 Flehmig, Hauler, Knoop, Munkel: Improvement of Vehicle Dynamics by Networking of ESC with Active Steering and Torque Vectoring. 8th Stuttgart International Symposium Automotive and Engine Technology, Report Vol. No. 2, PP. 277...291, Vieweg Verlag, Wiesbaden 2008.
Introduction: The vehicle body or the body shape determines the external shape of a vehicle and is itself essentially determined by the vehicle purpose or the use and the addressed customer group, but also by social, technological, and design trends. Design trends and the combination of body shape archetypes have consistently given rise to new body shapes. One example of this is the Sports Utility Vehicle  and the classic off road vehicle. Even new drive concepts, such as for example the electric drive, influence the realized body shapes. Vehicle body and vehicle concept, described by the essential main dimensions and the positioning of the main components and the occupants, are closely interlinked. For this reason, first the body shapes and then the development of the vehicle concept or the vehicle architecture will be discussed in the following. To conclude, the effects of current technological trends such as for example automated driving and virtual product development on vehicle conception and vehicle bodies will be described.
Milestones in automobile history The history of the automobile has been marked by many individual discoveries, which will only be briefly described here. New product and process technologies have consistently led to innovations and trend reversals in the development of the automobile.
In 1886 Carl Benz and Gottlieb Daimler, independently of each other, built the first motor carriages with an internal combustion engine and thereby initiated the triumphal advance of motorized private transport. However, by the end of the 19th century it had still not been decided which drive would gain acceptance in the automotive industry.
Already in 1834 Thomas Davenport in the USA built the first electrical DC motor and demonstrated its operation using an electrically powered model locomotive which was equipped with a non rechargeable battery. In 1837 Davenport in the USA was awarded a patent for his electric motor. At the same time and independently in 1834 Moritz Hermann von Jacobi also developed an electric motor with a power output of approximately 15 W. In 1835 the two Dutchmen Sibrandus Stratingh and Christopher Becker constructed an electric motor which was used to drive a small model vehicle the first demonstrable use of an electric motor. In 1881 the first electrical three wheeler was demonstrated by Gustave Trouve at the International Exposition of Electricity in Paris, i.e., already five years before the first automobile with internal combustion engine. In 1882 Werner Siemens ran on a test track in Berlin the "Electromote", the forerunner of today's trolley buses. In 1888 Andreas Flocken developed the first electric car from Germany with pneumatic tires and electric headlamps and a top speed of 15 km/h. In 1897 electric taxis were introduced in New York and by 1899 already 90 % of all the taxis in that city were electrically powered.
also built as alternatives to the internal : combustion engine drive and the electric drive. Examples include the White Touring Car from the White Motor Corporation and the Stanley Steam Car from the Stanley Motor Carriage Company.
Only with the invention of the electric starter in 1909 by Kettering in the USA and through further development in 1914 by Bosch in Germany and due to the rapid expansion of a filling station network for mineral oil based fuels was the internal combustion engine able to gain acceptance as the dominant drive for automobiles and push electric and steam vehicles into niche markets.
The invention of the pneumatic tire in 1888 by Dunlop in the UK and the invention of the steering wheel in 1900 by Packard in the USA are further milestones on the road to today's automobile. In 1914 Ford introduced assembly line production with the Model T. As a result, automobiles could be produced in large numbers and were able to conquer the roads .
Not only the drive technology but also the configuration of the drive has influenced the automobile body shapes. The rear wheel drive is the oldest form of drive and refers to a vehicle with a powered rear axle irrespective of the layout of the engine. In the standard drive the engine is housed in the front end and drives the rear axle through a propeller shaft with cardan universal joints via the differential. This makes it necessary to have a transmission or center tunnel and gives rise to weight and installation space disadvantages. On the other hand, the standard drive facilitates the separation and splitting of the steering function and the drive function to one axle each and thereby results in better weight distribution. The rear axle is also powered in the rear wheel drive. Here the rear engine, transmission, and drive axle form a complete drive unit at the rear of the vehicle. A front wheel drive in conjunction with a front engine is generally referred to as a front wheel drive. Further drive configurations are the all wheel drive with two powered axles, the rear wheel drive with mid engine, and the rear wheel drive with transaxle configuration. The front wheel drive and the standard drive have predominantly gained acceptance today.
Since the 1990s the electrification of the drive has experienced a renaissance. However, this was initially confined to concept vehicles and pilot tests, e.g., on the island of Rugen onto the market. Today electrification of the drive and the trend towards automated vehicles are opening up new possibilities for fashioning vehicle body shapes.
In more recent developments body shapes have become increasingly diversified. Each era has had its preferred body shapes. Thus in the 1980s Chrysler with the Chrysler Voyager popularized the family van or people carrier  in Germany, SUVs held a market share of around 25 % of passenger car sales.
Definitions: Vehicle architecture The vehicle architecture constitutes the totality of the components and systems of a vehicle family which facilitates a derivation of all the planned derivatives and body shapes of that vehicle family. Legal requirements, market and customer requirements, functional requirements, ergonomic requirements, safety requirements, production requirements, and economic requirements are all taken into account in the definition of vehicle architecture. The focus in vehicle architecture is on the concept determining modules, components, and systems.
Vehicle concept "The vehicle concept the structural design of a product idea with which the fundamental feasibility is safeguarded" .
DKK0036E Development aims and requirements Production concept Locations, architectures, modules, logistics Drive concept Assemblies, accumulators, drivetrain Interior concept Seats, shelves, variability Dimensional concept Number and layout Seats, stowage space, main dimensions Exterior and interior design Formal esthetic design of the vehicle
Vehicle package "The package is the gradually refined elaboration of the design during the development of the vehicle with the aim of constantly check the technical feasibility of the planned product and the dimensional interaction of all the assemblies and components" . This entails as a matter of priority the optimal use of the installation spaces in the vehicle. The different conflicts of aims, space requirements, and functional dependencies are weighed up and carried over into an arrangement that satisfies all the components geometrically and physically. This arrangement of all the components in the vehicle is called the vehicle package or package.
Vehicle body and vehicle segments The vehicle body or the body shape is primarily determined by the vehicle purpose and the addressed customer group. Styling trends, social trends, and statutory provisions as well have consistently given rise to new body shapes. Historically, new vehicle body shapes have frequently come about as the result of elements from existing body shapes being put together in new ways. This is shown particularly in the so called "cross over body shapes", such as for example the Sports Utility Cabriolet .
This classification has been used to explain the vehicle body shapes and vehicle segments in Figures 2a, 2b, and 2c. Also customary internationally are still further classifications of vehicles into segments which follow a similar logic, e.g., the vehicle segments of the EU Commission or the vehicle size categories of the NHTSA  in the USA and other.
shape of the sedan, which was previously the dominant body shape, has continued to diversify starting out from the three basic shapes of notchback, squareback, and station wagon/estate.
The development of the SUV body shape from the classic off road vehicle with elements of sedan like body shapes is an example of the creation of new body shapes. SUVs are characterized by a high seat position, increased ground clearance, an at least disengageable all wheel drive, and a characteristic body shape based on an off road vehicle. Over time SUVs have been able to gain acceptance as an alternative to the high capacity sedan and establish itself as a new body shape across all vehicle size categories . This development continues and results, for example by borrow 
Figure 2: Vehicle body shapes and vehicle segments: a) Vehicle body shapes and vehicle segments using a sedan as the example, b) Development of body shapes and vehicle segments on the example of an SUV, c) Further body shapes and vehicle segments. Body shapes and manifestations Description of the body shapes Minicar Subcompact Compact class Mid range Upper  mid range Luxury class Squareback Body shape, 2 box design, with tailgate  for simple payload x x x rare a b c a b c a b c DKK0037 2Y
ing from other classic body shapes like : the Coupe, in the new body shape of the Sports Utility Coupe. An example of an SUV Coupe is the Mercedes Benz GLE.
There is a trend, particularly in electric vehicles, towards SUV Coupes. Examples of SUV Cabriolets are the Range Rover Evoque Convertible and the VW T Roc Convertible.
There are other relevant body shapes which are depicted in Figure 2c. These are, firstly, the emotive body shapes sports car and supercar and, secondly, the practical body shapes like the Multi Purpose Vehicle , and the pickup as a cross over from the SUV and the light duty truck.
Whereas the high capacity sedan, e.g., the Renault Espace, is a family car with plenty of room and a variable folding seating concept which is derived from a passenger car architecture, the high capacity van is a high vehicle derived from a light utility van architecture which is often characterized by removable seats mounted on continuous rails. The VW Bulli minibus was definitive of the high capacity van. Today the segment is widely diversified.
can take on different manifestations depending on the functional objectives of the vehicle. Each of the vehicle systems has, through further development of the requirements, the potential to generate new body shapes.
The drive determines the architecture and the dimensional concept. a) Internal combustion engine architecture with standard drive, b) Electric drive architecture with rear wheel drive. DKK0038 4E Radiator system Luggage compartment Internal combustion engine Cockpit Passengers Transmission Differential Exhaust gas system Frunk Traction battery and battery cooling HV EE components and cable set Electric drive Passengers AC charger and charging socket a b Cockpit Fuel tank Propeller shaft Radiator system Luggage compartment
The first disciplines involved in the vehicle concept are complete vehicle design, vehicle design , and vehicle safety determine the vehicle concept. Here complete vehicle design has an integrating function along the vehicle conception process.
The vehicle design type constitutes the basis for all the design and constructive considerations with regard to styling, surface, and the like .
The complete vehicle conception with its main functions of dimensional conception, ergonomics, and packaging embodies the "technical knowledge" in vehicle body development. It is responsible for complying with the statutory provisions and integrating the requirements from design, aerodynamics, vehicle safety among others.
by comparison with the technical "hard : points" , in which the surfaces are optimized from an optical and design perspective.
The most important target variable of vehicle aerodynamics is aerodynamic drag, supplemented by the output at the rear end, the aeroacoustics , and the avoidance of contamination. From the aerodynamics perspective vehicles are blunt bodies which move with minimal ground clearance above the road surface .
DKK0039 1E A Class surface Design freeze Model decisions Requirements Use cases Competition analysis Personas Dimensional concept Technology package Virtual reality scene 3D exterior and interior models Operation and ergonomics Design trends Drawing Choice of direction 1:4 clay models Interior seat box 1:1 clay model  wrapped Profile Ideas phase Concept phase Detail phase
used across a number of body variants. : Volume manufacturers today develop body variants for model families which use common concepts and components.
These are called the vehicle architecture. The interior concept and the drive concept have the greatest interactions with the sought after body shape.
On the basis of the general vehicle concept consisting of the subconcepts drive concept, chassis concept, body concept among others the main dimensions of the vehicle such as vehicle length, vehicle width, and vehicle height as well as the interior dimensions are defined . Selected external dimensions as per SAE or ECE are shown in Figure 5.
In the interior an empirical relationship between interior height and interior length can be demonstrated. In taller vehicles the occupants are seated in a more upright position and consequently the vehicle interior can theoretically have a shorter design . Limits to this correlation are presented by the legroom and kneeroom of the occupants. Selected internal dimensions are shown in Figure 6.
The path from the first strategic considerations to the finished vehicle concept covers a number of steps. The first vehicle package should be kept simple and only show the essential concept features. With regard to the vehicle body, the first socalled "hard points" are defined. These are definitions of the main dimensions which are set for legal, strategic, design or technical reasons. The vehicle proportions are defined by few boundary conditions which are set in the vehicle profile, such as for example the number of occupants, the drive type and drive position, the wheel and tire sizes and the size of the luggage compartment, the ground clearance, and the sought after crash safety level. These definitions are referred to in the following as functional vehicle objectives . Conception steps Step 1 Step 1 The design process starts with the idea generation for design and package and is geared towards the functional objectives for the vehicle concept. Even initial considerations regarding the body structure and the doors, gates, and lids have some bearing on the initial design. Further elaboration of the vehicle body in conducted from the inside outwards.
visibility, but also functional and ergonomic considerations have a bearing on the choice of seat position, such as for example the aerodynamics of the resulting vehicle body and the ergonomics of the entry/exit. Digital human models representing specific percentiles of the height distribution of potential customers are used in the validation of the requirements ). Step 3 Step 3 In the third step the rear passengers are positioned. Here today depending on the vehicle segment one or two rearseat rows are conceivable. The number of passengers in the rear who sit next to each other determine the vehicle width at the height of the respective seat row. For example, two individual seats, two full seats and one emergency seat or three full seats are conceivable in the rear. Legroom, headroom, and shoulder room of the rear passengers are verified with digital human models.
Passenger car steering wheel position as  per DIN 70020 . R point: Seat reference point, AHP: Accelerator heel point.
 R point Center steering wheel AHP Pedal level A18 D9 L11 H17 H30 L53 A46 A40 Torso line L50 2 L114 H30 1 H5 1 A40 1 A40 2 L113 L53 1 8deg 8deg H61 1 H61 2 L53 2 H30 2 W20 2 W20 1 W3 1 Front Rear W3 2 W27 Viewing angle top Viewing angle bottom DKK0042 1E
drive types or drive configurations result : if necessary in new vehicle body shapes. Step 5 Step 5 In the fifth step the position of the occupants is established in the y direction , having regard to the packaging of the drivetrain, the crash behavior, and the comfort requirements. This definition is crucial to the feeling of space and comfort in the interior, but also to the safety of the passengers in the event of a side collision. In this phase a rough package of the occupants and all the essential assemblies should verify the rough dimensional concept in the essential dimensions . In practice the individual steps can also take place on account of project specific settings in a different order. Statutory provisions with regard to width and height of the vehicle body must be verified and observed.
Step 6 Step 6 In the sixth step the installation spaces are defined for the payload. Depending on the requirements profile the length of the overhangs is influenced by the required load compartment space and in turn gives rise to segment specific body shapes, e.g., station wagon. New drive concepts here open up new stowage space options, such as for example the so called frunk and in the underbody area as well as appropriate ground clearance.
Steps 7 and 8 Steps 7 and 8 In the next steps 7 and 8 the wheelbase and the wheel and tire dimensions are finally established. The distance between the vehicle axles determines the weight distribution and the package efficiency as well as the comfort of the occupants. Here the benefit dimensions of the vehicle and also the sought after price positioning must be observed. Low priced subcompact size cars are generally built as compactly as possible. This produces a short vehicle length, but also a relatively confined vehicle interior. For premium vehicles the wheelbase is chosen in such a way as to create a generous feeling of space. Particularly in electric vehicles with long ranges the battery installed in the underbody is decisive for the wheelbase. Boundary conditions such as the turning circle also have a bearing on the dimensioning of the wheelbase. The ground clearance requirements are also verified in this step.
Step 9 Step 9 In the ninth step the respective track of the front and rear axles is established. Particularly in the rear area there are here conflicts of aims between the space requirement of the passengers and the axles, wheels and tires on the one hand and the aerodynamics, which can be improved by reducing the vehicle width at the rear, and the stylistic body design of the vehicle.
Step 10 Step 10 In the tenth and last conception step the vehicle .
Sectional elaboration of the : vehicle concept Installation space sections The sections through the vehicle divide the vehicle installation space into sections which can be elaborated with segment and body specific targets and the crash structure necessary to satisfy the front collision requirements are the determining issues in this installation space section.
Section A A Section B B Section C C Section D D Section E E Section A A B B C D E C D E DKK0043E L101 DKK0044 1E
scribes the rear passenger compartment. : The number of rear seat rows, the sitting posture of the rear passengers, and their legroom and kneeroom determine the length of the wheelbase and thus also the vehicle length.
Section 4 Section 4 The luggage compartment is the fourth and last installation space section. It is determined by the required load compartment space, the packaging of a fuel tank or a traction battery or if necessary a spare wheel, and the required crash length in the event of a rear impact. Vehicle length The four installation space sections result in the vehicle length, which for its part is subject to segment specific and legal restrictions. The dimension chain in the x direction is shown in Figure 9.
Vehicles should adhere to the customary garage dimensions and length restrictions, for example for carriage on motorail trains or ferries. A generous vehicle length furthermore entails additional weight, additional costs, and driving performance limitations. Therefore the complete vehicle conception aims to minimize the vehicle length by adhering to all the requirements.
Current trends of vehicleconcept development New technological and social developments influence vehicle conception. This changes the process of vehicle conception through new methods and tools and can also result in new body shapes.
Electrification of the drivetrain The transition to electromobility means that a traction battery of a size commensurate with the range requirements of the customers must be accommodated in the vehicle. The battery modules can be installed in a distributed arrangement in the vehicle or as a large battery pack, e.g., in the underbody. In fuel cell vehicles hydrogen accumulators must be incorporated aside from a smaller high voltage battery and the e machine together with inverter. Energy storage devices, such as for example high voltage batteries and hydrogen tanks, are today usually accommodated in the underbody. If in future the volumetric energy densities of energy storage devices increase due to technological advances, the installation space situation will ease and lower architectures will be easier to implement.
Automated driving Automated driving is one of the trends for the 21st century. This carries with it new installation space demands for powerful computers and sensors, e.g., lidar sensors, video cameras among others, which are required for highly automated driving. On the other hand, highly automated driving could open up the opportunity to deliver the vision of accident free driving. Technologies like drive by wire .
Digitalization of vehicle development: Increasing digitalization in vehicle developing opens up to vehicle constructors and designers new opportunities to develop vehicles digitally from the outset. This ranges from modern tools for quickly sketching and designing vehicle surface models through data driven development, which makes possible in connection with "machine learning" the development of intelligent vehicle systems. The digital transformation of the vehicle development process makes possible the collaborative integration of representatives of different specialist departments and divisions, even beyond corporate boundaries and national borders .
Virtual reality VR tools including headsets for augmented and mixed reality used to be classed with video games and films. Today they accelerate vehicle development and enable vehicle concept teams around the world to completely refashion vehicles and mobility experiences. Form finding for new vehicle models and the presentation of innovative vehicle concepts can take place in a virtual future, be experienced immersively, and be discussed and further developed with decision makers.
Furthermore, VR tools play an increasingly more important role in the functional verification of vehicle concepts. Here the tools are used in a so called mixed reality, where physical structures vehicle design process. ________________________________ References References S. Macey, G. Wardle: H Point: The Fundamentals of Car Design & Packaging.
 A. Achleitner, Ch. Burgers, G. Dollner: Fahrzeugkonzept und Package. In: Pischinger & Seiffert , Vieweg Handbuch Kraftfahrzeugtechnik, Chapter 4.2. pp. 140 170, Springer Vieweg, ATZ/ MTZ Fachbuch, 8th Edition, 2016.
 J. Weissinger, T. Breitling: Fahrzeugkonzeption in der fruhen Entwicklungsphase. In: Pischinger & Seiffert , Vieweg Handbuch Kraftfahrzeugtechnik, pp. 1276 1282. Springer Vieweg, ATZ/ MTZ Fachbuch, 8th Edition, 2016.
 H. Winner, S. Hakuli, G. Wolf : Handbuch Fahrerassistenzsysteme: Grundlagen, Komponenten und Systeme fur aktive Sicherheit und Komfort. Springer Vieweg, 3rd Edition, 2015.
Classification of commercial : vehicles Commercial vehicles are used for the safe and efficient transportation of persons and freight. In this respect, the degree of economic efficiency is determined by the ratio of usable space to overall vehicle volume, and of payload to gross vehicle weight. Dimensions and weights are limited by legal regulations.
A wide variety of vehicle types meet the demands of local and long distance transportation, as well as the demands encountered on building sites and in special applications .
Due to the wide diversity of vehicle types, the process of calculating the dimensions of the body structures statutory safety standards.
a) Light utility van, b) Truck,  c) Articulated road train,  d) High capacity road train,  e) Semitrailer Bus.
Light utility vans: Areas of application These are light utility vans . In both cases, stringent demands are made on the vehicle in terms of agility, performance, user friendliness, and safety.
Body structure variants of light utility vans The design concepts are based on frontmounted engine, front or rear wheel drive, independent suspension, or rigid axle and, with overall weights of over 3.5 to 4 t, twin tires on the rear axle.
The product range includes enclosed body multipurpose panel vans and platform body vehicles, as well as low bed and high bed platform trucks with special superstructures and crew cabs .
Up to approximately 6 t overall weight, the bodies form an integral load structure unit together with the chassis . These open designs also serve to build up box or recreational vehicle bodies.
Mediumand heavy duty trucks and tractor units Body Trucks are divided into four essential subtypes: long distance transport vehicles, delivery vehicles, construction vehicles, and special vehicles. What all these vehicles have in common is a supporting frame structure on which a resiliently mounted cab is located and which constitutes a body which is connected with shear strength to the frame. The maximum dimensions and maximum permitted vehicle weights are subject to statutory provisions, which sometimes differ significantly from country to country. The maximum dimensions with regard to overall and semitrailer lengths are stipulated for example in Europe by Directive 96/53/EU is currently being technically elaborated. In the NAFTA zone, however, only the semitrailer length, but not the overall length, is subject to restriction.
Equipped with a front mounted engine, the drive is provided via one or more dual tire rear axles. In individual cases, the rear axle is fitted with single tires. Fourwheel drive with an additional transfer case including interaxle differential lock is also used for construction site applications with high traction requirements. The powered axles in this case have as standard axle differential locks in their differentials and interaxle differential locks for tandem axle assemblies.
Chassis Designations Designations The type of truck chassis , the vehicle has two steered front wheels.
suspensions reduce the body accelera : tion to improve driving comfort, protect the load, and reduce strain on the road. They also facilitate the raising and lowering of swap bodies and the attachment and removal of semitrailers. These applications are usually used with 4 x 2 and 6 x 2 chassis for long distance transport and delivery traffic.
Tandem axle assemblies Tandem axle assemblies For construction site use or in the case of increased traction requirements the chassis are equipped with several powered axles between the axles. In the case of non combined pneumatically sprung single axles, the axle load is normally compensated pneumatically by altering the spring stiffness of the pneumatic suspension of the single axles.
Leading and Leading and trailing axles trailing axles Three axle vehicles to increase the payload capacity. If the chassis is fitted with a leading axle, this is mounted as an additional axle in front of the powered rear axle and provided with pneumatic suspension.
These leading axles usually have a steered design in order to avoid constraints when cornering, deliver a small turning circle, and thereby increase the maneuverability of the complete vehicle. The steering was effected in the first designs by a steering linkage branched from the steering axle, but is now equipped as a rule with electro hydraulic steering because this does not require a linkage that takes up valuable space.
a) 4 x 2 . a b c d SFG0056 1Y
ulated road trains, steered trailing axles : came to the fore with the desire for improved maneuverability against the backdrop of the increased use of three axle chassis in delivery traffic. In view of the space conditions the trailing axle here is as a rule fitted with electro hydraulic steering so that these variants can be flexibly used with different chassis and wheelbases. The use of a steered trailing axle offers, with a corresponding vehicle configuration, the combination of the load capacity of a three axle chassis with the maneuverability of two axle vehicle, which affords considerable benefits in economic terms. The trailing axles are also designed to be liftable virtually across the board with the previously mentioned advantages.
Where 6 x 2 chassis are operated on dirt roads or outside Europe, there are twin tire rigid trailing axles with a bearing load of 9 to 10 t. As a rule, these are not designed to be liftable, but liftable variants are possible.
For special chassis the multiple fitment of leading and trailing axles or even the use of powered leading or trailing axles is conceivable. These chassis variants are conceived as special constructions and constitute technical challenges in that each axle must be assigned a different steering angle for the wheels so that the vehicle runs without excessive tire wear when cornering and complies with the turning circle requirements. Combining a number of leading and trailing axles can thus also produce fiveto eight axle chassis which make possible gross vehicle weight ratings of over 60 t, for example for the mounting of concrete pumps or lifting work platforms with a working height of up to 112 m.
and the driver's cab is positioned on the chassis frame  determines the level of torsional stiffness. Torsionally flexible frames are preferred in mediumand heavy duty trucks because they allow the suspension to cope better with uneven terrain. Torsionally stiff frames are more suitable for light duty delivery vehicles.
1 Rear underride guard, 2 Tail cross member,  if necessary with trailer hitch, 3 Side member, 4 Cross member, 5 Gusset plate, 6 Side underride guard, 7 Coupling mouthpiece, 8 Radiator guard and  front underride guard.
Apart from the force introduction points, : critical points in the chassis frame design are the sideand cross member junctions . Special gusset plates or pressed cross member sections form a broad connection basis. The junctions are riveted, bolted, and welded. Uor L shaped side member inserts provide increased frame flexural strength and reinforcement at specific points.
The chassis frame also serves to accommodate by means of a variety of holders a wide range of add on components such as fuel tanks, battery device holders, compressed air tanks, exhaust gas system, or spare wheel. The configuration varies here, depending on the application profile required. Special mounted installations such as, for example, loading cranes or platform lifts are likewise mounted on the chassis frame for corresponding applications.
Driver's cab There are a variety of cab designs available depending on the vehicle concept. In delivery vehicles and for public service use, low, convenient entrances are an advantage, whereas in long distance transport applications, space and comfort for example with a level floor are more important. Modular design concepts allow for short, medium and long cab versions while retaining the same front, rear and doors.
The cab is connected to the chassis frame by the cab mounting. A distinction is made here between comfort and standard mountings with different springand damper combinations or transverse leaf spring links with natural frequencies of 1 to 6 Hz.
From the design concept viewpoint, a distinction must be made between cabover engine  or hydraulic cab tipping mechanism provides access to the engine.
The standards required of the driver's cab with regard to aerodynamics, choice of materials, corrosion or equipment must be viewed as the same as the standards required of an automobile body. This means that, to save fuel and consequently CO2 emissions, the aerodynamic drag of firstly the cab and secondly the entire truck trailer must be reduced. Both the tractor vehicle and the trailer or the semitrailer must be included in the analyses for this purpose. Field tests show that including the semitrailer in the optimization of the complete vehicle aerodynamics can achieve fuel savings of between 2 % and 4.5 %.
Body structures Specific body structures such as flatbeds, box vans, dump truck deep beds, tankers, and concrete mixers permit the economical and efficient transportation of a wide variety of freight and materials. The body and load bearing chassis frame are joined sometimes by means of auxiliary frames with non positive or positive attachments. Special design features . For offroad vehicles the torsional flexibility of the chassis frame must not be limited by a rigid body structure. Three point mountings of the body structure are therefore used. For these vehicles coil instead of leaf springs are also used in the chassis to achieve large spring deflections.
tion unit increases, the costs relative to the freight volume decrease. Load volume is increased by reducing the empty spaces between the cab, body, and trailer . Advantages of semitrailer rigs lie in the greater uninterrupted loading length of the cargo area and possible shorter inoperative times of the tractor units. Measures to improve aerodynamics, such as front and side panels on the vehicle and specially adapted air deflectors from the cab to the body, are applied to minimize fuel consumption.
The use of longer heavier vehicles which do not exceed the gross weight rating of 40 t but extend the overall road train length to 25.25 m can generate additional economic benefits. These longer heavier vehicles are used for light but bulky transported goods, e.g., for molded parts for the automotive industry, or in the transport of consumer goods.
Buses: The bus market offers a specific vehicle for practically every application. This results in a wide range of bus types, which differ in their overall dimensions .
Bus types Microbuses Microbuses Minibuses carry up to approx. 20 passengers. These vehicles have been developed from light utility vans weighing up to approximately 4.5 t.
Miniand Miniand midibuses midibuses Buses which can carry up to approximately 25 persons are called minior midibuses. The transition from minibus to midibus is fluid. These vehicles have for the most part been developed from light utility vans weighing up to approximately 7.5 t. They are occasionally built on ladder type chassis of light duty trucks, or a unitized integral structure is used. A modified suspension design and special measures carried out on the body result in optimum ride comfort and low noise levels.
City buses City buses City buses are equipped with seating and standing rooms for scheduled routes. The short intervals between stops in suburban passenger transportation operations require rapid passenger turnover. This is achieved by wide doors that open and close swiftly, low boarding heights .
The use of double decker buses provides increased transport capacity.
Now articulated buses with an overall length of almost 21 m and a total weight of 32 t are used in large numbers as city buses. These make use of an additional steered trailing axle which increases the bus' weight capacity and at the same time improves the maneuverability despite the greater overall length.
Intercity/overland buses Intercity/overland buses Depending on the application are used. Intercity buses come in lengths of 11 to 15 m as rigid vehicles or in lengths of 18 m as articulated vehicles.
tions and did not gain acceptance. Double: deckers, on the other hand, are frequently used as intercity buses, particularly on long distance bus routes which are operated with tour buses.
Trailer operation Buses with trailers are increasingly being used. This applies to all applications, i.e., city and intercity/overland buses, as well as to tour buses.
In city bus applications trailers are specially approved to carry passengers and at peak times are hitched to the towing vehicle to meet passenger demand. This type was used up until the 1960s, but disappeared very quickly with the emergency of articulated buses. Since around 2010 the city bus/trailer combination has been back in favor so as to provide a flexible response to passenger fluctuations depending on the time of day on the outskirts of big cities.
With intercity/overland buses trailers serve to transport luggage or to carry bicycles in vacation regions so as to be able to offer an attractive and flexible means of transport for changing to local public transport.
In the case of tour buses, particularly double deckers, which in view of their design can offer minimal luggage space, the luggage trailer is a good solution as an economical and comfortable means of travel. The approval of trailers for cruising speeds identical to buses without trailers  entails no drawbacks in terms of travel times, increasing the attractiveness.
Body Lightweight design based on a unitized body has gained acceptance as standard . Except for miniand midibuses, this design is not commonly encountered in Europe.
and then connected with a long propeller : shaft to the powered axle, but instead the engine/transmission unit is installed at the rear end of the bus. This also applies to articulated buses, in which the last axle is powered. Pneumatic suspension on all axles permits ride level stabilization and a high degree of ride comfort. Intercity buses and tour buses are mainly equipped with independent suspension on their front axles. Disk brakes, frequently supported by retarders, are used on all axles.
Alternative drives In view of the increasing sensitivity of users and operators of commercial vehicle, increasing endeavors are being made to produce alternative drives for commercial vehicles. The advantage of vehicles with alternative drives is that they comply with CO2 legislation, avoid break in restrictions, and satisfy the demands of society in general. These demands on the one hand relate to eliminating the dependence on petroleum fuels, whose days as fuels are numbered. They relate on the other hand to reducing the emission of CO2 as a combustion product that contributes substantially to the greenhouse effect.
Both light utility vans and buses can be equipped for urban operation with a natural gas, a battery electric, or a fuel cell drive. Likewise, battery drives are also available for heavy trucks in local goods and delivery traffic. A future development task is to come up with the best complete vehicle concept for an electric truck and in so doing bring into line the general design of the battery with regard firstly to range, installation space, weight, and costs, and secondly to the demands of daily operation .
Active and passive safety  in commercial vehicles Active safety comprises all the systems and measures which help to avoid an accident. Passive safety is intended to limit the consequences of accidents and to protect other road users. Systematic recording of accidents, accident tests with complete vehicles, and intensive computer optimization help to devise safety measures.
Active safety A minimum of active safety systems is redefined on a regular basis by legislative bodies. Where the antilock braking system and the active brake assistant.
The availability of a comprehensive package of active safety systems is a necessary precondition for the application of high automated or autonomous driving, a epoch making change in truck operation. Passive safety Requirements Requirements Generally, the effectiveness and strength of occupant restraint systems has to be demonstrated. Therefore, the dimensioning of commercial vehicle body structures must take account of aspects, such as the strength and rigidity of seat belt anchor points on the seats and of the related body structures .
In the event of a collision, the driver's cab and the passenger cabin must maintain the amount of room necessary for occupant survival, while at the same time deceleration must not be excessive. Depending on vehicle design, there are a variety of solutions to this problem. In light utility vans, front section design is energy absorbing as in passenger cars. In spite of shorter deformation paths and higher levels of released energy, the physiologically permissible limits are not exceeded in virtually all passenger car
crash test standards has to be demonstrated mathematically or by testing.
In the case of trucks, the side members extend up to the front fender and can absorb high linear forces. Such passive safety measures are based on accident analyses and are intended to improve the structural design of the cab. Static and dynamic stress and impact tests at the front and rear of the cab, as well as on its roof, simulate the stresses involved in a frontal impact and in accidents in which the vehicle overturns, rolls over, or in which the cargo moves. They are described in the Regulation ECE R29 , but the passing of these tests as a condition of type approval is only required in a few European countries.
Statistical analyses have proved that the bus is the safest means of passenger transportation. Static roof load tests and dynamic overturning tests provide evidence of body strength. The use of flame retardant and self extinguishing materials for the interior equipment of the vehicle minimizes the risk of fire.
Side, front and rear underride guards help to reduce the danger of the lighter vehicle driving under the heavier vehicle. In other words, they serve to protect other road users .
________________________________ References References 96/53/EU: Council Directive 96/53/EC of 25 July 1996 laying down for certain road vehicles circulating within the Community the maximum authorised dimensions in national and international traffic and the maximum authorised weights in international traffic.
 2015/719/EU: Directive .
 ECE R 29: Regulation No. 29; Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to the protection of the occupants of the cab of a commercial vehicle: Revision 1.
Lighting at the vehicle front end The primary function of the headlamps at the vehicle front end is to illuminate the roadway so that the driver can detect traffic conditions and recognize any obstacles and hazards in good time. They also serve to identify and mark out the vehicle to oncoming traffic. The turn signal lamps serve to show the driver's intention to change direction or to indicate a hazardous situation.
Lighting at the vehicle rear end Lights are turned on at the vehicle's rear end in accordance with the lighting and weather conditions and indicate the vehicle's position. They also indicate how the vehicle is moving and in which direction, e.g., whether the brakes are applied or the driver is intending to change direction, or whether a hazardous situation exists. The reversing lamps illuminate the roadway while the vehicle is reversing.
Lighting in the vehicle interior In the vehicle interior, priority over all other functions is given to the ease and reliability with which the switch elements can be reached and operated, and to provide the driver with sufficient information on the vehicle's operating states , where they satisfy a prime requirement for relaxed and safe vehicle operation. Optical and acoustic signals must be prioritized according to their urgency and then relayed to the driver.
Regulations and equipment: Approval codes and symbols,  Europe/ECE Automotive lighting equipment is governed by national and international design and operating regulations, according to which the equipment in question must be manufactured and tested. For every type of lighting equipment, there is a special approval code and symbol which has to be legibly displayed on the equipment concerned. The preferred locations for approval codes and symbols are places that are directly visible when the hood is open, such as the lenses of headlamps and other lights, and the headlamp unit components. This also applies to approved replacement headlamps and lights.
If an item of equipment carries such an approval code/symbol, it has been tested by a technical inspectorate .
Regulations for the USA In the USA, lighting equipment is governed by regulations that are very different from those in Europe. The principle of self certification compels each manufacturer as an importer of lighting equipment to ensure, and in an emergency to furnish, proof that its products conform 100 % with the regulations of FMVSS 108 .
Upgrading and conversion Vehicles imported to Europe from other regions must be modified to comply with European directives. This applies in particular to the lighting equipment. Identical components available for the European market can be used as direct replacements. Other solutions, such as retail products or, in certain cases, retention of the original equipment, require an engineer's report. In Germany, Article 22a of the StVZO  requires "Approximation Certificates" for lighting equipment. Such certificates are issued by the Lighting Technology Institute of Karlsruhe University.
Subsequent alterations to type approved headlamps, bases, and sockets invalidate the type approval and consequently the general operating license of the vehicle. 1335
Light sources: With regard to automotive light sources, a distinction is made between thermoluminescent radiators , are also thermal radiators. The evaporation of the tungsten and the resulting blackening of the bulb restrict the service life of this type of lamp.
Halogen lamps Halogen lamps A halogen filling , must surround the filament closely. A further advantage of this measure is that a higher filling pressure can be used, thereby providing additional resistance to tungsten evaporation.
Electroluminescent radiators Gas discharge lamps Gas discharge lamps Gas discharge lamps are electroluminescent radiators and distinguished by their higher luminous efficiency. A gas discharge is maintained in an enclosed, gasfilled bulb by applying a voltage between two electrodes. The atoms of the emitted gas are excited by collisions between electrons and gas atoms. The atoms excited in the process give off their energy in the form of luminous radiation.
Light emitting diodes Light emitting diodes A light emitting diode or LED is an electroluminescent lamp. Thanks to their robustness, high energy efficiency, fast reaction time, and compact construction, LEDs are used as illuminators or displays in a wide range of applications. They are used in motor vehicles in the passenger compartment to provide illumination, as displays or for display backlighting. In the exterior areas LEDs are fitted in particular in auxiliary stop lamps and tail lamps. With a further increase in their luminous efficiency, they can increasingly be used in lamps and main functions at the front end of the vehicle.
Motor vehicle bulbs: Replaceable filament bulbs for motor vehicle lighting must be type approved in accordance with ECE R37 . Other light sources which do not comply with these regulations are permitted, but can only be installed as a fixed component part of a lamp or as a "light source module".
bulb types are identified by different base shapes. Bulbs of differing operating voltages are labeled with this voltage in order to avoid mix ups in the case of identical bases. The bulb type suitable in each case must be indicated on the equipment.
The luminous efficiency is primarily a consequence of increasing the filament temperature. Gas discharge bulbs provide a luminous efficiency in the order of 85 lm/W for substantial improvements in low beam performance.
LEDs today achieve a luminous efficiency in the range of 50 lm/W . An increase in luminous efficiency of up to 25 % is expected in the next few years. Main light functions Low beam The main light for driving at night is provided by low beam headlamps. The creation of the characteristic light dark boundary was one of the technological milestones in lighting technology.
The "dark above/bright below" distribution pattern resulting from the light dark boundary furnishes acceptable visual ranges under all driving conditions. This configuration reduces glare, to which approaching traffic is exposed, within reasonable limits, and at the same time it supplies relatively high luminous intensity in the area below the light dark boundary. The light distribution pattern must combine maximum visual ranges with minimum glare effect. These demands are supplemented by other requirements affecting the area directly in front of the vehicle. For instance, the headlamps must provide assistance when cornering, i.e., the light distribution pattern must extend beyond the left and right side extremities of the road surface.
With the asymmetrical low beam pattern the light dark boundary in the right area slopes upwards so that the right side of the road is better illuminated. This prevents oncoming traffic from being dazzled. This is mirror inverted in left hand drive vehicles.
L Service life , U Operating voltage, I Lamp current, P Lamp power output, Ph Luminous flux.
Table 1: Specifications for the main motor vehicle bulbs 35 approx.
Table 1 Yellow light version.
High beam: High beam headlamps illuminate the road to the maximum range. This creates a high luminous intensity, depending on the distance, acting on all objects in the space reserved for traffic. High beam headlamps are therefore only permitted when they do not dazzle oncoming traffic .
Installation and regulations Designs Designs Global regulations mandate two headlamps for low beam and at least two high beam units for all dual track vehicles. The light color is white.
Dual headlamp system Dual headlamp system The dual headlamp system .
Quad headlamp system Quad headlamp system Two of the headlamps in a quad headlamp system provide both high and low beam, while the second pair only provides high beam illumination .
UKB0226 1E High and low beam a High and low beam or low beam Low beam b c High beam High beam or auxiliary high beam Fog lights
The installation regulations described in the following refer to passenger cars. Low beam Regulations prescribe 2 white light lowbeam headlamps for multiple track vehicles .
Homologation testing is carried out under laboratory conditions using test lamps manufactured to more precise tolerances than those installed in production vehicles. The lamps are operated at the specified test luminous flux for each lamp category. The laboratory conditions apply across the board to all headlamps, but only take limited account of the specifics of individual vehicles, such as headlamp fitted height, vehicle power supply, and adjustment.
High beam A minimum of two and a maximum of four headlamps are prescribed for the high beam mode. The prescribed instrument cluster high beam indicator lamp is blue or yellow in color.
The high beam is usually generated by a light source located at the focal point of the reflector . This causes light to be reflected outward in the direction of the reflector axis. The maximum luminous intensity achievable by the high beam is largely a function of the reflector's illuminated area.
In quad headlamp systems, in particular, roughly paraboloid high beam reflectors can be replaced by units with complex geometrical configurations designed to supply a "superimposed" high beam pattern. The calculations employed to design these units seek to achieve a high beam distribution that harmonizes with the lowbeam pattern . The pure high beam is "superimposed" as it were on the low beam projection. The annoying overlap area close to the front of the vehicle is done away with in this case. High beam light distribution pattern is defined in the regulations and guidelines together with stipulations governing the low beams.
Any point in zone III Any point in zone IV Any point in zone I <= 0.7 >= 3 <= 2E1) 1) E is the current measured value  in point 50R or 50L.
250 375 875 1,750 750 750 250 15deg 45deg 9 12 10 4 5 6 1 2 3 H H 15 7 8 F2 F3 F4 F5 F1 11 16 V V Zone III Zone IV Zone I 14 13
each headlamp. 430,000 cd corresponds : to the figure 100. The luminous intensity of the high beam is indicated by the number, e.g., 25, stamped next to the round ECE approval mark. If these are the only headlamps on the vehicle , then the composite luminous intensity is in the range of 50/100 of 430,000 cd, i.e., 215,000 cd.
Auxiliary driving lamps Auxiliary driving lamps are used to complement the effectiveness of the high beam in standard high beam headlamps. Auxiliary driving lamps are mounted and aimed in the same way as standard headlamps, and the underlying lighting technology is the same. Auxiliary driving lamps are also subject to the regulations governing maximum luminous intensity in vehicle lighting systems, according to which the sum of the reference numbers of all headlamps fitted to a vehicle must not exceed 100. For older headlamps without approval number, the number 10 is used for general assessment purposes.
Lowand high beam switching All high beam headlamps must extinguish simultaneously when the low beams are switched on. Dimming is permitted, with a maximum dimming period of 5 seconds. A 2 second response delay is required to prevent the dimming feature from activating when the headlamp flashers are used.
When the high beam headlamps are switched on, the low beam units may continue to operate . H4 bulbs are generally suitable for short periods of use with both filaments in operation.
Main light functions  for the USA Regulations and directives The national standard is the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard to which it refers.
The regulations governing installation and control circuits for main headlamps are comparable in parts to those in Europe. Since 5/1/1997, however, headlamps with light dark boundaries have also been authorized in the USA, but these require manual adjustment. It is now possible to develop headlamps which conform to legal requirements in both Europe and the USA.
As in Europe, dualand quad headlamp systems are used in the USA. The fitting and use of fog lamps and additional high beam headlamps, however, are subject to a variety of, in some cases, widely diverging, local laws passed by the 50 individual states.
High beam The designs for high beam headlamps are the same as in Europe. Differences exist in the required dispersion width of the light pattern, and there is a lower maximum figure on the axis of the high beam headlamp.
a) Road perspective from driver's viewpoint, b) Measurement point relative to road perspective as per FMVSS 108 .  a  b 1deg 2deg 3deg 4deg 0deg H H 0deg V 2deg 4deg 6deg 8deg 10deg 12deg 2deg 4deg 6deg 8deg 10deg 12deg 1deg 2deg 3deg 4deg 12 11 14 19 20 2 4 9 10 13 3 6 5 5 8 8 15deg 20deg 10deg 15deg 20deg 17 21 18 15 16 V 1 7 6 7 UKB0403bY UKB0403a 1Y
The whole unit is sealed and filled with an : inert gas. If a filament burns through, the entire light source must be replaced. Units with halogen lamps are also available. The limited range of available sealedbeam headlamps on the market severely restricted the freedom of design for vehicle front ends.
Vehicle headlamp aiming device This design involves replaceable bulb headlamps which are adjusted vertically with the aid of a spirit levels integrated in each headlamp, and horizontally by means of a system comprising a needle and dial. In fact, this is equivalent to "onboard aiming".
Headlamps for visual aim .
Either the left horizontal light dark boundary . This increases the potential dazzling risk of such systems.
10 cm/10 m, results in a geometric range equal to 100 times the headlamp's fitted height within the luminance distribution of the human visual field is still visible.
The visual range is influenced by the shape, size, and reflectance of objects, the road surface type, headlamp design and cleanliness, and the physiological condition of the driver's eyes. Due to the large number of influencing factors, it is not possible to quantify this range using precise numerical definitions. Under extremely unfavorable conditions .
Disability: glare: Disability: glare This is the quantifiable reduction in visual performance that occurs in response to light sources emitting glare. An example would be the reduction in visual range that occurs as two vehicles approach one another.
Discomfort: glare Discomfort: glare This condition occurs when a glare source induces discomfort without, however, causing an actual reduction in visual performance. Discomfort glare is assessed according to a scale defining different levels of comfort and discomfort.
Headlamp technology Reflector focal length Reflector focal length Conventional reflectors for headlamps and other automotive lamps are usually parabolic in shape . A reflector with a short focal length makes efficient use of the filament bulb and has high efficiency because the reflector extends outward to encompass the bulb, allowing it to convert a large proportion of the luminous flux into a useful light beam.
Angles of geometric visibility Angles of geometric visibility These are angles that are defined relative to the axis of the lighting device, at which the illuminated area must be visible.
Technical design variations of headlamps Components Parabolic reflector Parabolic reflector Reflectors direct the light from the light source either directly onto the road . The reflectors are made of plastic, diecast metal or sheet steel.
Plastic reflectors are manufactured by injection molding , which offers a considerably better precision of geometry reproduction than the deep drawing of sheet steel reflectors. The geometric tolerances that can be achieved lie in the range of 0.01 mm. The base material requires no corrosion proofing treatment.
The die cast metal used is usually aluminum, or occasionally magnesium. The advantages are high thermal resistance and the ability to produce shapes with a high degree of complexity .
The surfaces of thermosetting plastic and die cast metal reflectors are given a smooth finish by spray painting or powder based paint before a layer of aluminum 50 to 150 nm thick is applied. An even thinner transparent protective coat prevents the aluminum from oxidizing.
Sheet steel reflectors are manufactured using deep drawing and punching dies. A powder based paint is then applied. This process hermetically seals the sheet steel and gives it excellent surface smoothness. The base coat created in this way is, like other reflectors, coated with aluminum.
Free form reflectors Free form reflectors Furthermore, reflectors in stages and any desired facet distributions can also be implemented. The geometrical configurations of free form reflectors are generated using complex mathematical calculations . Here, the low mean focal length f is defined relative to the distance between the reflector vertex and the center of the filament. Typical values range from 15 to 25 mm.
In the case of reflectors partitioned with : steps or facets, each partition can be created with its own mean focal length f. Diffusing lenses Diffusing lenses A large proportion of contoured diffusing lenses is manufactured using high purity glass . During the lens molding process, high priority is given to surface quality in order to prevent undesirable upward light deflection in the final product this would tend to create glare for oncoming traffic. The type and configuration of the lens prisms depend on the reflector and the desired light distribution pattern.
Cover lenses Cover lenses The clear cover lenses used on modern headlamps are usually made of plastic. Besides reducing weight, plastic lenses provide other advantages for automotive applications, including greater freedom in headlamp and vehicle design. Since around 2007 multicolor plastic lenses  have also been used in which the edge area is sprayed in a different color, usually black or gray. The advantage here is that the spray tools are designed in such a way that no inner slides are needed and therefore no separating lines are created on the visible surface. Light dispersion from the edge areas is also avoided.
Conventional reflection headlamps For conventional headlamp systems with virtually parabolic reflectors , the quality of the low beam increases in direct proportion to the size of the reflector. At the same time the geometric range increases as a function of installation height.
These factors must be balanced against the aerodynamic constraints according to which the vehicle's front end profile must be kept as low as possible. Under these circumstances, increasing the size of the reflector results in wider headlamps.
Reflectors of a given size, but with different focal lengths, also perform differently. Shorter focal lengths are more efficient and produce wider light beams with better close range and side illumination. This is of particular advantage during cornering.
Specially developed lighting programs  enable the implementation of infinitely variable reflector shapes with non parabolic sections and of faceted reflectors.
Headlamps with facet type reflectors In the case of facets, the reflector surface is partitioned and each individual segment is individually optimized. The important feature of surfaces with facet type reflectors is that discontinuity and steps are permitted at all boundary surfaces of the partition. This results in freely shaped reflector surfaces with maximum homogeneity and side illumination .
PES headlamps: The PES headlamp system  reflector in combination with optical projection technology. A screen reflected with the objective projects precisely defined light dark boundaries. Depending on specific individual requirements, these transitions can be defined as sudden or gradual intensity shifts, making it possible to obtain any geometry required.
PES headlamps can be combined with conventional high beams, position lamps and PES fog lamps to form lighting strip units in which the entire headlamp is no higher than approximately 80 mm.
In PES headlamps, the beam path can be configured in such a way that the surroundings of the objective are also used in the signal image. This enlargement of the signal image is used above all with small objective diameters to reduce the psychological glare for the oncoming traffic. The additional surface can also be made into a lens, a partially vapor deposited screen or a design feature with illuminated round or rectangular gaps, or illuminated three dimensional objects.
Performance: Performance The arc of the 35W xenon bulb D2S delivers, when compared with the H7 bulb, twice the luminous flux with a higher color temperature can be used to obtain "instant light". 2000 hours of service life are sufficient for the average required total duration of operation in passenger cars. As no sudden failure occurs as in the case of a filament, diagnosis and replacement in good time are possible.
Categories Categories At present gas discharge lamps with the type designations D1 and D2 and since 2012 only the type designations D3 and D4 are used in the power rating range of 35 W. In the D3 and D4 families dosing of the heavy metal mercury can be dispensed with. These lamps are distinguished by lower lamp voltage, a different plasma composition, and different arc geometries. The same applies to the new categories of 25W gas discharge lamps D5, D6 and D8. The electronic control units for the individual lamp types are generally developed for a specific design type and are not universally interchangeable.
1 ECU, 2 To vehicle electrical system, 3 Shielded cable, 4 Ignition unit of D1S/D3S lamp, 5 Projection module, 5a Burner of D1S/D3S lamp, 5b Lens.
1 UV glass shielding bulb, 2 Lead in insulator, 3 Discharge chamber , 4 Electrodes, 5 Bulb base, 6 Integrated ignition and control unit. UKB0374 6Y 1 2 3 4 5 6
base. Category D5 lamps are a special : case these lamps have the advantage that both the ignition unit and the control unit are already integrated in the base of the gas discharge lamp.
All systems feature two subcategories: S lamps for projection system headlamps and R lamps for reflection headlamps with an integrated light shield for producing the light/dark boundary comparable with the bulb cover used for halogen H4 low beams. At present the D1S and D3S lamps are the type most widely used.
Electronic ballast unit Electronic ballast unit An integral part of the Litronic headlamp , controlled power supply during the warm up phase when the lamp is cold, and demand oriented supply during stationary operation.
The system furnishes largely consistent levels of illumination , re ignition is spontaneous and automatic.
The electronic ballast unit responds to defects by interrupting the power supply to help avoid injury in the event of contact.
1 ECU, 1a DC/DC converter, 1b Shunt, 1c DC/AC converter, 1d Microprocessor,  2 Ignition unit, 3 Lamp socket, 4 D2S lamp, UB Battery voltage. 1a 1c 1d 1b 2 UB 3 4 1 UKB0223 1Y
Light distribution: Light distribution The xenon light emitted by Litronic headlamps produces a broad carpet of light in front of the vehicle combined with a long range . This has made it possible to achieve substantially wider road illumination patterns for lighting the edges of bends and wide roads as effectively as a halogen unit illuminates straight stretches of road. The driver enjoys substantial improvements in both visibility and orientation in difficult driving conditions and bad weather.
Headlamp leveling control Headlamp leveling control In accordance with ECE Regulation 48 , Litronic headlamps with 35W gas discharge lamps are combined with automatic headlamp leveling control and headlamp cleaning systems. These requirements do not apply to headlamps with 25W lamps on account of the lower luminous flux of the lamps, i.e., such headlamps may also like halogen headlamps be operated with manual headlamp leveling control. This makes it easier to switch from halogen to 25W gas discharge headlamps in the aftermarket sector.
Bi Litronic "Projection" .
In the bi xenon version, when the high /: low beam switch is operated, an electromechanical actuator moves the gas discharge lamp in the reflector into the appropriate position for producing the high or low beam as required .
LED headlamps Potential for reducing energy consumption Potential for reducing energy consumption LEDs are increasingly being used as economical alternatives in reducing CO2 emissions and fuel consumption. The energy consumption of the main light functions will play a significant role in future low energy vehicles. Xenon and LED alternatives offer the levels of optimized consumption and improved road safety called for by the EU. Today's LED systems already consume, depending on performance , this means potential savings of 30 to 70 W per vehicle.
One projection system and two reflection elements are used for the low beam spot. The light of three multichip LEDs each with two LEDs is concentrated by three primary optical elements and imaged by a projection lens. The optical system incorporates a screen to guarantee the quality of the light dark boundary. A reflector is positioned both above and below the lens .
The optical efficiency of the LED low beam headlamp is roughly 45 %. Compared with this, the efficiency of a bi xenon system is around 33 %. This can be explained by the nature of LEDs, which give off their light only to the half space and do not, like conventional light sources, illuminate the entire space. Because of the higher efficiency of an LED system, less luminous flux is needed in the LEDs to deliver the same luminous flux to the road with one LED low beam headlamp.
The better LEDs will become in future, the less power will be output by the control unit, the light performance always being kept at a constantly high level.
Around 75 % of total worldwide mileage is completed during daytime hours. Great importance is therefore also attached to the energy consumption of the daytime driving lights function. A typical LED daytime driving light has an energy consumption of 14 W .
Laser light Functions in the headlamp whose light source is based on a blue laser diode are intended to improve orientation in fog, snow, heavy rain, and dust. A beam of light with a particularly high side dispersion is generated for this purpose. This ensures that the side of the road which is close to the vehicle is particularly well illuminated. The brightness levels achieved on close objects are significantly higher. Unlike the usually dark road surface far ahead of the vehicle, these high brightness levels help drivers to find their bearings better despite the poor weather conditions.
Paraboloid with diffusing lenses Paraboloid with diffusing lenses A parabolic reflector featuring a light source located at the focal point reflects light along a parallel axis . A special bulb cover prevents the beam from being projected upward.
Free form technology Free form technology Calculation methods, such as CAL .
PES fog lamps PES fog lamps This technology minimizes reflected glare in fog. The screen, the image of which is projected onto the road surface by the lens, provides a light dark boundary with minimum upward light dispersion.
Innovations Innovations The technical functional importance of the fog lamp has been pushed into the background slightly by the introduction of powerful halogen, xenon and AFS systems. The emphasis is still on the demand for improved lighting in traffic situations with adverse ambient conditions. This can be solved by separate fog lamps of the type used up to now , or by combinations of the two functions.
Light functions: Cornering headlamps Cornering headlamps have been approved for public use since the beginning of 2003. Whereas previously only highbeam headlamps were allowed to turn in response to changes in steering angle . This provides for a larger visual range on winding roads.
Static cornering headlamps Static cornering headlamps Static cornering headlamps are used mainly to illuminate areas close to the side of the vehicle . For this purpose, activating additional reflector elements is generally the most effective way.
algorithms. General legal requirements : specify that the headlamp beam may only be turned as far as the center line of the road at a distance of approx. 70 m in front of the vehicle to prevent glare for oncoming vehicles.
Road safety and driving convenience Road safety and driving convenience The introduction of dynamic cornering headlamps is a significant improvement in the safety and convenience of driving at night . Compared with conventional low beam headlamps, improvements in visual range of approximately 70 % are achieved, representing an extra 1.6 seconds of travel time. With cornering headlamps, a motorist can assess hazards better and start braking sooner. As a result, the severity of an accident can be significantly reduced. Static cornering headlamps double the visual range for turning maneuvers.
pattern of cornering headlamps a) Left hand bend, dynamic cornering headlamps, b) Right turn, static cornering headlamps. 1 Halogen headlamps, 2 Xenon headlamps, 3a Adaptive light distribution pattern with dynamic cornering headlamps, 3b Adaptive light distribution pattern with static cornering headlamps.           UKB0408 1E
Most variants of the poor weather light feature movement of the left cornering headlamp module by 8deg to the side and simultaneously a slight lowering or activation of the static cornering lights. This provides for very wide illumination of the road and the edge of the road. In future, component elements, for example the elements responsible for widened side illumination, will be activated sequentially. Control parameters are, for example, steering angle information and direction indicator actuation. The individual segments are then "quasidynamically" activated.
Light functions and driver assistance Light functions and driver assistance systems systems The introduction of video technology in automotive engineering makes it possible to implement camera based headlamp functions as well. When the position of an oncoming vehicle is identified by the camera, the headlamp or the AFS system can adapt the range of the driving lights in such a way that it is increased for large distances and reduced for smaller distances . This ensures optimum illumination without dazzling oncoming traffic.
Glare free high beam "Glare free high beam" is a light function which is classed as part of the high beam but in contrast to the conventional high beam can also be activated in traffic situations with preceding or oncoming traffic. This function is referred to in the international context and in the statutory provisions as Adaptive Driving Beam .
Dynamic system Dynamic system This type is based on the dynamic cornering headlamps . In the "normal" high beam both the partial highbeam distributions are superimposed in the middle to achieve high luminous intensities in the central range. To prevent other road users from being dazzled, a shadow is generated in the corresponding position and width with the dynamic movement of both sides.
1 Road illumination with highway beam, 2 Road illumination with expressway beam. SKB0890 1E 40 0 20 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 40 20 1 2 Change in the detection distance Road illumination to the front Illumination on the side
Matrix system: Matrix system In realizing the glare free high beam as a matrix system the light distribution is made up typically of 12 to 18 strips. Individual LEDs or LED arrays with individually switchable chips are used as light sources and the specific attributes such as compact shape, rapid switch on and switch off, and dimmability are used. Each strip is formed by an LED chip. The shadow adapted to the traffic situation is formed by the specific switching off of individual LEDs or groups of LEDs. For "normal" high beam distribution all the LEDs are operated and a balanced light distribution is created by means of a dimming profile.
Matrix headlamps Matrix headlamps Three row modules with 84 pixels are available in some vehicles as a further development of the one row matrix systems for glare free high beam. The shadows for fading out other road users can be positioned even more precisely with the finer pixel resolution . Further shadows can additionally be created for example to fade out road signs.
Matrix in the low beam Matrix in the low beam The essential difference from the one row systems is that with this type part of the low beam is also formed with the matrix module. This enables even the dynamic cornering headlamps without mechanical actuators to be implemented by purely electronic means via activation of the LEDs. In addition, the specific dimmability of areas of the light distribution can be used in adverse weather light to reduce the dazzling of oncoming traffic via the reflection on the wet road.
Installation and regulations : for signal lamps These types of lamp are intended to facilitate recognition of the vehicle, and to alert other road users to any intended or present changes in direction or motion. Uniform, distinctive colors in the red, yellow or white color range are prescribed for these lamps to denote their application. White, yellow and red lights are used to mark the positions of the vehicle at the front, the sides and the rear respectively. Stop lamps and rear fog warning lamps are also red. Yellow lights are used in most applications for turn signal lamps. Only in the USA are red turn signal lamps also permissible at the rear.
As projected along the reference axis, minimum and maximum luminous intensities for all lamps must remain within a range calculated to guarantee signal recognition without, however, causing glare nuisance for other road users.
ECE R48 and 76/756/EEC specify Group 1  turn signal lamps for vehicles with three or more wheels. For motorcycles, Group 2 turn signal lamps are sufficient.
The lamps are electrically monitored. A function indicator is required inside the vehicle. The dashboard mounted monitoring lamp may be in any color desired.
The flashing frequency is 90 +30 cycles per minute with a relative illumination period of 30 to 80 %. Light must be emitted within 1.5 s of lamp switch on. All the turn signal lamps on one side of the vehicle must flash synchronously. If one lamp fails, the remaining lamps must continue to generate visible light.
Two lamps each .
Design regulations Design regulations The design requirements for Europe are set out in the ECE Regulations R6, R7, R23, R38 and R87 .
In the USA, FMVSS 108 specifies the number, location, and color of signal lamps. The design and technical lighting requirements are defined in the relevant SAE standards.
Basic light Matrix system for low beam V V Reutlingen SKB0898 3E
Hazard warning and turn signal flashers : Hazard warning and turn signal flashers for vehicles without trailer for vehicles without trailer The electronic hazard warning and turn signal flashers include a pulse generator designed to switch on the lamps via a relay and a current controlled monitoring circuit to modify the flashing frequency in response to bulb failure. The turn signal control stalk controls the turn signals, whereas the hazard flashers are operated using a separate switch.
Hazard warning and turn signal flashers Hazard warning and turn signal flashers for vehicles with trailer for vehicles with trailer This type of hazard warning and turn signal flasher differs from those employed on vehicles without trailers in the way that the function of the turn signal lamps is controlled when they flash to indicate a change in direction.
Single circuit monitoring The tractor and trailer share a single monitoring circuit designed to activate the two indicator lamps at the flashing frequency. This type of unit cannot be used to localize lamp malfunctions. The flashing frequency remains constant.
Dual circuit monitoring Tractor and trailer are equipped with separate monitoring circuits. The malfunction is localized by means of the indicator lamp. The flashing frequency remains constant. Tail and position lamps .
According to ECE R48 and 76/756/EEC, vehicle and trailer combinations wider than 1,600 mm require position lamps  must also be equipped with clearance lamps visible from the front and rear.
a nested design, the luminous intensity : ratio for the individual functions must be at least 1 : 5. Tail lamps must operate together with the position lamps.
Vehicles wider than 2,100 mm require two white lamps facing forward, and two red lamps facing to the rear. They must be positioned as far outward and as high as possible.
According to ECE R48, vehicles of any length exceeding 6 m must have yellow side marker lamps except on vehicles with cab and chassis only.
Type SM1 side marker lamps may be used on vehicles of all categories; type SM2 side marker lamps, on the other hand, may only be used on cars.
Additional reflective items are permitted if they do not impair the function of the legally required lighting and signaling equipment.
Two colorless, non triangular front reflectors are required on trailers and on vehicles on which all forward facing lamps with reflectors are concealed . They are permitted on all other types of vehicle.
Yellow, non triangular, side reflectors are required on all vehicles with a length exceeding 6 m, and on all trailers. These are permitted on vehicles shorter than 6 m. Two red triangular rear reflectors are required on trailers, but are banned on motor vehicles.
ECE R48 permits either two parking lamps at the front and rear, or one parking lamp on each side. The prescribed colors are white facing forwards and red facing rearwards. Yellow may also be used at the rear if the parking lamps have been designed as single units together with the side turn signal lamps.
The parking lamps must be designed to operate even when no other vehicle lights  are on. The parking lamp function is usually assumed by the tail and position lamps.
According to ECE R48, the rear license plate must be illuminated so as to be legible at a distance of 25 m at night.
Across the complete license plate, luminance must be at least 2.5 cd/m2. The luminance gradient of 2 x Bmin/cm should not be exceeded between any of the test points distributed across the surface of the license plate. Bmin is defined as the smallest luminance measured at the test point. The regulations set out in SAE J587, Oct. 1981, apply in the USA.
According to ECE R48, all cars must be fitted with two type S1 or S2 stop lamps, and one type S3 stop lamp, colored red in each case .
When a nested design with stop and tail lamps is used, the luminous intensity ratio between individual functions must be at least 5 : 1.
The Category S3 stop lamp must not be a combined unit incorporating any other lamp. The regulations set out in SAE J586, Feb. 1984, apply in the USA.
For EU/ECE countries, ECE R48 prescribes one or two red rear fog warning lamps for all new vehicles. They must be distanced at least 100 mm from the stop lamp .
The visible illuminated area along the reference axis may not exceed 140 cm2. The circuit must be designed to ensure that the rear fog warning lamp operates only in conjunction with the low beam, high beam and/or front fog lamp. It must also be possible to switch off the fog warning lamps independently of the front fog lamps.
Rear fog warning lamps may only be used if the visual range due to fog < 50 m, as rear fog warning lamps have a high luminous intensity that can severely dazzle drivers at the rear when there is a clear view. The required indicator lamp is yellow in color.
According to ECE R48, one or two white reversing lamps are permitted . The switching circuit must be designed to ensure that the reversing lamps operate only when reverse gear is engaged and the ignition on.
Daytime running lamps and daytime driving lights In the vehicle type approval the fitting and use of daytime running lamps has according to ECE R87  been mandatory in Europe since February 2011 for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles; since August 2012 this has also applied to all other vehicle categories.
1 Stop lamp, 2 Two rear fog warning lamps, 3 One rear fog warning lamp for driving on right. 1,000 250 100 3 1 UKB0243 2E 1,000 250 100 1 2 UKB0242 2E
the engine is started and remain lit until : either the front headlamps or fog lamps are switched on or the engine is turned off. The regulations set out in FMVSS108  apply in the USA.
Two cornering lamps are permitted on the front of the vehicle which must radiate light at least 60deg to the outside of the vehicle. They are used in cornering maneuvers up to a maximum speed of 40 km/h to illuminate better the destination road which is usually inadequately lit by the regular headlamps. The front cornering lamps are activated via the turn signal control stalk or when the steering wheel is turned. Front cornering lamps typically have the same light distribution as static cornering headlamps. The switching conditions, however, are different. For the most part the same reflector is used for both the static cornering headlamps and the front cornering lamps.
Identification lamps According to ECE R65 , identification lamps must be visible from any direction, and create the impression of flashing. The flashing frequency is 2 to 5 Hz. Blue identification lamps are intended for installation on official vehicles. Yellow identification lamps are designed to warn of dangers or the transport of dangerous freight.
Technical design variations for lamps Light color Depending on their application .
Filter technology can also be used to : design lamp lenses in such a way that, when the lamp is switched off, the color is matched to the vehicle's paintwork. Nevertheless, existing homologation regulations are complied with when the lamp is on. Color locations have been laid down in the EU/ECE region. They correspond to a wavelength of approximately 592 nm for "yellow/orange" turn signal lamps, for example, and to a wavelength of approximately 625 nm for "red" brake and tail lamps.
Lamps with Fresnel optics The light from the bulb is projected directly . This concept is a highly cost effective solution in that no vapor deposited surface is needed. The drawbacks are low efficiency and the limited vehicle design options.
Lamps with reflector optics Lamps with approximately parabolic reflectors or stepped reflectors direct the light from the bulb in an axial beam, and shape the beam by means of the optical dispersion elements in the lens .
Lamps with free form reflectors achieve the required beam spread or light pattern, completely or partially, by directing the light by means of a reflector. The outer lens can thus be designed as a clear lens, or supplemented by cylindrical lenses in the horizontal or vertical direction.
Designs combining both the above principles have also been successfully employed. The principle of the free form lamp with Fresnel cap combines excellent luminous efficiency with a variety of possible stylistic implementations . It is essentially the reflector that shapes the light pattern. The Fresnel cap improves luminous efficiency by diverting a proportion of the light, which would not otherwise contribute to the function of the lamp, in the desired direction.
Lamps with light emitting diodes Light emitting diodes . In addition, LEDs in stop lamps provide an added safety aspect. An LED reaches maximum light output in less than 1 ms, whereas filament bulbs require about 200 ms to reach their nominal luminous flux. This means that LEDs emit the brake signal sooner, and this in turn reduces reaction time. With their improved efficiency with regard to luminous flux, luminance, thermal performance and mechanical design, LEDs can also be used for functions with higher lighting requirements.
a) With attachment optics, b) With reflector, c) Example of a daytime running lamp. 1 Heat sink, 2 LED, 3 Optics, 4 ECU, 5 Flexboard, 6 Holder, 7 Cover.
the vehicle electrical system. They require : both a defined voltage, which ranges depending on the semiconductor material between 2.2 V and 3.6 V, and a defined current, by means of which the luminous intensity is adjusted. Resistor solutions can be used for activating functions with very low photometric requirements. Most applications require linear controllers or DC/DC converters. The electronics can be either integrated as individual electronics in the lamp or in a self contained ECU, which is either mounted to the lamp or in the vehicle.
Lamps with fiber optic technology By using optical fibers/waveguides, the light source can be separated from the light emission point. In order to obtain the desired light pattern, special beam launchers in the optical waveguides, or optically active elements on or in front of the optical waveguide are required. Filament lamps can be used as light sources, but the high infrared levels are a drawback of these lamps. This necessitates the use of heat resistant materials such as glass or heat shields. When using LEDs as "cold" light sources, it is possible to launch directly into transparent plastics such as PC .
Adaptive rear lighting systems Until now, rear lighting functions were produced with a one level circuit. Depending on the version and design, this resulted in a fixed luminous intensity that had to lie within the legal limit values to guarantee minimum visibility.
1 Optical waveguide, 2 Beam launcher,  3 Lamp or LED. b UKB0411Y, UKB0412Y a 1 2 3
0 Tail lamp Adaptive tail light Stop lamp Adaptive stop lamp Rear fog light Adaptive rear fog light Turnsignal lamp Adaptive turnsignal lamp 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 cd SKB0892E
Although this equipment is not mandatory : in other countries, its use is permitted. Automatic headlamp leveling control must be designed to compensate for vehicle laden states by lowering or raising the low beam by between 5 cm/10 m .
A manual headlamp leveling control device is operated from the driver's seat and must incorporate a detent position in the base setting; beam adjustment is also performed at this position. Units with infinitely variable and graduated control must both feature visible markings in the vicinity of the hand switch for vehicle load conditions that require vertical aiming. Technical design variations All design variations employ an adjustment mechanism to provide vertical adjustment of the headlamp reflector , while automatic units rely on level sensors on the vehicle axles to monitor suspension spring compression, and relay the proportional signals to the adjustment mechanisms.
Hydromechanical systems Hydromechanical systems Hydromechanical systems operate by transmitting a fluid through the connecting hoses between the hand switch and the adjustment mechanisms. The degree of adjustment corresponds to the quantity of pumped fluid.
Vacuum systems Vacuum systems With vacuum systems, the hand switch regulates vacuum from the intake manifold, and transmits it to the adjustment mechanisms to achieve varying degrees of adjustment.
is projected on a surface vertical to the : road surface at the height of the center of the headlamp and above. If, however, the vehicle is subject to extreme variations in attitude due to changes in payload, the headlamps must be adjusted so that the desired aim is achieved.
ECE R48 shall apply.
are set and operated to the correct level according to the operating instructions. Tire pressure The tire pressure must be adjusted as per the vehicle manufacturer's instructions in accordance with the laden state.
positively locating adjuster positions: On vehicles on which the headlamp beam is raised as the vehicle payload is increased, the adjuster must be set to the position at which the beam is at its highest .
which do not run on tracks, vertical alignment relative to the vehicle's longitudinal center axis should be carried out separately for each headlamp. The test should then be carried out without moving the unit sideways again.
for the headlamp concerned should then be set on the headlamp aiming device, and the headlamp adjustment checked and the headlamp adjusted to the correct setting.
a distance of 10 m in front of the vehicle so that the center mark is aligned with the center of the headlamp under test or adjustment . In the case of lamps with very low beams (e.g.,
Notes on adjustment Notes on adjustment In the case of headlamps with asymmetrical lower beams and fog lamps, the highest position of the light dark boundary must be on the top cutoff and run as horizontally as possible across the minimum width of the test surface. The lateral adjustment of the headlamps must be such that the light pattern is positioned as symmetrically as possible about the perpendicular line running through the center mark.
In the case of headlamps for asymmetrical lower beam, the light dark boundary must touch the top cutoff to the left of the center. The intersection between the left section and the sloping section on the right of the light dark boundary must be located at the perpendicular line passing through the center mark.
Headlamp position: height above road surface Adj. dimension "e" Low Fog lamp beam Approved to  76/756/EEC or ECE R48 and StVZO, first registered on 1 Jan 1990 or later, < 1200 mm Adj.
Headlamp aiming devices: Headlamp aiming devices Function Correct adjustment of motor vehicle headlamps should ensure the best possible illumination of the roadway by the low beam while minimizing glare for oncoming traffic at the same time. For this purpose, the inclination of the headlamp beams with respect to a level base surface, and their direction to the vertical longitudinal center plane of the vehicle, must satisfy official directives.
The aiming device is aligned with the vehicle axis using a sighting device, such as a mirror with an orientation line. It is turned and aligned so that the orientation line uniformly touches two external vehicle reference marks. The imaging chamber can be moved vertically and clamped at the level of the vehicle headlamp.
Headlamp testing Headlamp testing The headlamp can be tested after the equipment has been correctly positioned at the front of the lens. An image of the light pattern emitted by the headlamp appears on the aiming screen. Some test devices are also equipped with photodiodes and a display to measure the luminous intensity.
On headlamps with asymmetrical lower beam patterns, the light dark boundary should touch the horizontal top cutoff; the intersection between the horizontal and sloping sections must be located on the perpendicular line running through the center mark  should be located within the rectangular border about the center mark.
Headlamp adjustment, USA: For headlamps compliant with US Federal legislation, visual adjustment as permitted since 5/1/1997 has become increasingly widespread in the US since mid 1997. There is no horizontal aiming here.
Before then, the use of mechanical aiming devices was the most common method of headlamp adjustment in the USA. The headlamp units were equipped with three pads on the lenses one for each of the three adjustment planes.
A calibrating unit is placed against these pads. Aiming is checked using spirit levels. With the VHAD method permitted since 1993, the headlamps are adjusted relative to a fixed vehicle reference axis. This procedure is carried out using a spirit level firmly attached to the headlamp. As a result, the three lens pads were no longer required.
 ECE R7: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of front and rear position  and their trailers.
 ECE R48: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to the installation of lighting and light signalling devices.
 ECE R53: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of category L3 vehicles with regard to the installation of lighting and light signaling devices.
 ECE R98: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of motor vehicle headlamps with gas discharge light sources.
 ECE R99: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of gas discharge light sources for use in approved gas discharge lamp units of power driven vehicles.
 ECE R112: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of motor vehicle headlamps emitting an asymmetrical passing beam or a driving beam or both and equipped with filament lamps and/or light emitting diode modules.
 ECE R113: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of motor vehicle headlamps emitting a symmetrical passing beam or a driving beam or both and equipped with filament lamps.
 76/756/EEC: Council Directive of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the installation of lighting and light signaling devices for motor vehicles and their trailers.
 93/92/EEC: Council Directive of 29 October 1993 on the installation of lighting and light signalling devices on two or three wheeled motor vehicles.
 SAE J186: Supplemental High Mounted Stop and Rear Turn Signal Lamps for Use on Vehicles Less than 2032 mm in Overall Width.
These substances are mixed in the form of quartz sand, soda ash, and limestone. Other oxides such as magnesium and aluminum oxide are added to the mixture in proportions of up to 5 %. These additives improve the physical and chemical properties of glass.
Manufacturing flat glass The glass panes are made out of the basic product, flat glass. Flat glass that is cast using the float glass process is used. This process involves melting the mixture at a temperature of 1,560 degC. The melt then passes through a refining zone at 1,500 to 1,100 degC, and is then floated on a float bath of molten tin. The molten glass is heated from above . The glass is cooled to 600 degC before it is lifted out of the float bath into the cooling section. After a further period of slow, nonstress cooling, the glass is cut into sheets measuring 6.10 x 3.20 m2.
Tin is suitable for the float glass process because it is the only metal that does not produce any vapor pressure at 1,000 degC and is liquid at 600 degC.
Property Dimension TSG LSG Density kg/m3 2,500 2,500 Hardness Mohs 5 to 6 5 to 6 Resistance to pressure MN/m2 700 to 900 700 to 900 E module MN/m2 68,000 70,000 Flexural strength  Before pre tension  After pre tension MN/m2 MN/m2 30 2 50 2 30 1 Specific heat kJ/kg * K 0.75 to 0.84 0.75 to 0.84 Thermal conduction coefficient W/m * K 0.70 to 0.87 0.70 to 0.87 Coefficient of thermal expansion K 1 9,0 * 10 6 9,0 * 10 6 Relative permittivity 7 to 8 7 to 8 Light transmittance . In calculating the permissible bending stress, the coupling effect of PVB film is to be disregarded. 2 Calculated values; these values already contain the necessary safety margins. 3 Figures for optical properties depend very much on the type of window. Automotive glazing
used primarily for windshields and rear windows, but also for sunroofs. LSG is also increasingly being fitted in vehicle side and rear windows.
on one side with noble metal and metal oxides; the coating reduces heat and UV radiation entering the vehicle, thus providing thermal insulation.
TSG panes TSG panes differ from LSG panes as they have greater mechanical and thermal strength, and their breaking and shattering behavior is different. They pass through a toughening process which greatly prestresses the surface of the glass. In case of breakage, these panes shatter into many small blunt edged pieces .
LSG panes An LSG pane is made of a crack proof, flexible plastic intermediate layer of polyvinyl butyral . The laminate retains its integrity and transparency when the glass is shattered.
Greenor gray tinted glass is used as heat absorption glass because it blocks the transmission of infrared rays more strongly than shorter wavelengths. On the other hand, it also reduces transmittance within the visual spectrum. The PVB film in LSG absorbs light in the ultraviolet range.
The optical properties of TSG and LSG panes are roughly the same because the optical properties of the intermediate plastic layer in LSG are very similar to those of glass in the visible spectrum.
1 Float glass and TSG windows, thickness 4 mm, non tinted,: 2 LSG windows, overall thickness 5.5 mm, non tinted, 3 LSG windows, overall thickness 5.5 mm, green. UV Ultraviolet, IR Infrared.
UKG0001 3E Wavelength Transmission Visible light IR UV % 100 80 60 40 20 0 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 3 2 1 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 um 1376 Vehicle bodies Functional design glazing The demands placed on glazing are continually increasing. The flat panes used in the past simply served to protect occupants from wind and weather. Now, automotive glazing performs a wide variety of functions.
Tinted glazing This is made from glass which is tinted within the material, and reduces the direct penetration of solar radiation into the vehicle interior.
The reduction in the transmittance of solar energy occurs chiefly in the long wavelength spectrum , and this mainly lowers the transmittance of energy, thus reducing the heat transmitted to the vehicle interior. The degree to which light transmittance within the visible spectrum is affected depends on the degree of color tinting and the thickness of the glass. For windshields, light transmittance must be at least 70 %. Strongly tinted glass with a light transmittance of less than 70 % can be used in windows from the B pillar to the rear, if the vehicle has two exterior mirrors. For sunroof glazing, tinted glass with a significantly lower light transmittance is used.
Coated glazing This type of glazing uses glass with a metal or metal oxide coating. Depending on the production process, the coating may be carried out before or after the sheet of glass is bent and prestressed. The coating is applied to the inner glass surface of an LSG pane.
This type of coated glazing has a light transmittance of less than 70 %. Consequently, it can be fitted from the B pillar to the rear, if the vehicle has two exterior mirrors.
Coated glass can also be used for sunroof glazing. Another type of sunroof glazing uses pyrolytically coated windows which are post processed after the coating has been applied.
Windshields with sunshield coating A coating is applied to the inner surface of the outer or inner layer of glass in a laminated glass pane. The coating is a multilayer interference system with silver as its base layer. As the coating is on the inside of the laminate, it is permanently protected against corrosion and scratching.
The purpose of the coating is to reduce : the transmittance of solar energy by more than 50 %. thus reducing the heat transmitted to the vehicle interior. Transmittance is reduced primarily in the infrared range so that visible light transmittance is altered negligibly. The reduction is achieved largely by reflection, so that secondary reflection into the interior is low. The light transmittance of this glass in the UV range is very low, i.e., less than 1 %. Sunroof glazing made from laminated safety glass The bent laminated safety glass consists of two tinted glass layers which are thermally partially prestressed in order to increase mechanical strength. They are bonded to either side of a highly crack resistant and specially tinted film. The overall thickness depends on the surface area of the glass, and the overall design of the sunroof.
Absorption that takes place mainly in the infrared range guarantees minimum heat penetration. The coating also provides low light transmittance and complete filtering of UV light.
Automotive insulation glass Automotive insulation glass is made of two flat or curved sheets of single pane toughened safety glass . This type of insulation glass reduces heating of the vehicle interior, particularly in combination with a tinted coating. Transmittance is reduced primarily in the infrared range so that visible light transmittance is altered negligibly. Insulation glass also provides better thermal insulation in the winter and improves sound insulation.
Heated laminated safety glass Heated laminated safety glass can be used for windshields or rear windows. They prevent icing and misting of the glass pane, even in extreme winter temperatures, and ensure clear visibility.
Heated laminated safety glass is made up of two more sheets of glass with a PVB film bonded between them. Inside the PVB film, there are heater filaments which may be less than 20 um thick, depending on the heat output required. The heater filaments may be laid in a waveform pattern or in straight lines. They may also run vertically or horizontally. The heated area may cover the whole of the pane or may be divided into separate zones with varying heat outputs. In this way, the windshield wipers can be prevented from freezing to the windshield in subzero temperatures.
Heated windows can also be created by layering. In contrast to filament heating, these layers have the advantage of being invisible and reflecting infrared radiation.
Automotive antenna glass: This type of glass has antenna wire embedded in it. In the case of windows made of single pane toughened safety glass , the antenna wiring system is embedded or printed onto the inner film.
Acoustic glazing An acoustic windshield is composed, like every windshield, of two individual sheets of glass an outer and an inner sheet which are firmly connected to each other by way of a sturdy plastic film of polyvinyl butyral . In the case of acoustic glazing, however, the conventional PVB film is replaced by acoustic PVB which has a highly damping acoustic core located in the middle between two layers of standard PVB. The two outer layers of film of conventional plastic thus safeguard the mechanical properties, while the core layer of damping material absorbs vibrations. Acoustic windshields reduce the transmission of low frequency engine vibrations into the vehicle interior. Engine vibration noises are absorbed by the windshield, these booming noises thus being reduced at low frequencies by up to 5 dB. Side windows can also be fitted with acoustic glazing in the meantime.
Water repellent glazing A coating on the glass causes tiny pearls of water to form on the glass surface when it rains. These are blown off the glass by the air stream.
Switchable glazing There are various technologies for influencing the transparency of a pane "at the touch of a button". One of the common methods is based on liquid crystal which are embedded in plastic foil. When a voltage is applied, all the crystals are orientated in one direction with the result that the pane is switched from opaque to transparent. The switching duration is under one second.
HUD glazing A head up display projects a variety of information onto the windshield while the vehicle is in motion. Unlike a conventional windshield, an HUD windshield uses PVB film which increases minimally in thickness from the engine edge to the roof edge. This produces a sharp HUD image of high optical quality. The optimum configuration between projector and windshield is being established as part of elaborate simulation and development work.
Legislators have translated the demand for adequate visibility into standardized areas of vision on the windshield . These are subdivided into several areas and must be cleaned by the wiper system to fixed percentage levels. The most important wiper systems for passenger car windshields which satisfy these requirements are shown in Figure 1. Wiper systems for commercial vehicles are similar to those for passenger cars, but are subject to different requirements especially with regard to driving speed and windshield shape.
Operating principle: Essentially a front wiper system consists of a wiper drive with or without linkage, the wiper arms, and the wiper blades .
The wiper drive moves the wiper arms at a specific angle over the windshield so that the driver and front passenger have a clear view. A specially shaped rubber wiper lip provides for an optimal wiper result.
Front wiper drive Motor gear unit Motor gear unit Front wiper drives essentially consist of an electric motor with a reduction gear. Mainly permanent field DC motors with brushgear .   Brushless permanent field DC motors with electronic commutation are for cost reasons still in the minority and only appear occasionally on the market.
Motor design Motor design The motors are for cost, weight and space reasons high speed in design. Adaptation to the speed and torque requirements of the wiper system is performed via the helical gear mechanism.
The primary function of wiper drives is to guarantee visibility under anticipated conditions, i.e., among others sufficiently frequent windshield wiping. For front wiper systems this usually means around 40 timers per minute . This is stipulated in Europe  with the demand for a wiping frequency of at least 10 and at most 55 wiping cycles per minute and a second wiping frequency of at least 45 complete wiping cycles per minute. The difference between the highest and lower wiping frequency must be at least 15 wiping cycles per minute.
and helical gear mechanism 1 Motor crank, 2 Worm,  3 Bearing,  4 Carbon brush,  5 Commutator, 6 Magnet,  7 Armature,  8 Output shaft,  9 Helical gear, 10 Gear mechanism cover, 11 Electrical connection.
Rotary drives: Rotary drives Rotary drives . The actual wiping motion on the windshield is determined by the wiper linkage and its kinematic configuration.
from the useful torque of the conductors : under the other magnet, the third brush, which concerns the number of conductors, acts is if to reduce the number of conductors for a constant wire cross section, i.e., the speed/torque curve should rotate about the starting point MA .
The wiper drives have a mechanical sensor system to ensure that the wiper blades adopt the correct parking position. Because the position of the output shaft of the rotary drive has a 1:1 correlation with the wiping angle, this function can be guaranteed with a reference position at the output. Mainly sliders in the gear mechanism cover with a contact disk in the helical gear are used as the parking position system .
Reversing drives Reversing drives In the case of reversing drives the output shaft oscillates at a defined angle, usually less than 180deg . Output to the wiper shafts is provided, as is also the case with rotary wiper drives, via a wiper linkage or in direct drives directly to the wiper shaft.
Wiper linkage The wiper linkage is the connection between the drive and one or more wiper arms. It transfers the movement of the wiper drive via the motor crank with ball pivot to the articulated rods and via these to the ball pivot of the wiper bearing . The wiper arm is connected by means of a collar nut for example to the wiper bearing shaft and the wiper drive is connected by means of a plate and corresponding screws in the gear mechanism housing to a shaped tube. The shaped tube simplifies installation in the vehicle and limits the wiping angle tolerances. The following different design variations are available.
determines the kinematic configuration of the linkage, i.e., the angle between the upper stop of the wiper blade near the A pillar .
1 Wiper bearing, 2 Wiper bearing shaft, 3 Ball pivot, 4 Wiper drive, 5 Motor crank, 6 Articulated rod, 7 Shaped tube, 8 Plate.
Omitting the shaped tube cuts down on : the number of wiper linkage parts, but increases the amount of fitting work by the vehicle manufacturer in that more parts must be connected to the vehicle. Furthermore, this increases the demands placed on the rigidity of the vehicle body and necessitates increased precision when installing the components in order to ensure wiping angle precision.
Additional functions, such as, for example, an extended parking position, an overload protection function , can be implemented with electronically controlled wiper systems.
 1 Steel strip with hook type fastening, 2 Joint section, 3 Tension spring, 4 Attachment part with taper for mounting on wiper bearing shaft.
a) Rotary drive with linkage, b) Reversing drive with linkage, c) Reversing direct drive with linkage, d) Reversing direct drive without shaped tube, e) Two reversing direct drives without linkage. 1 Rotary drive, 2 Reversing drive, 3 Reversing direct drive, 4 Wiper linkage.
the wiper blade for this purpose. This improves the cleaning effect, widens the field of vision, and facilitates a clear view. Unlike conventional systems, there is no wide area spray mist. This additionally improves the view event at higher driving speeds. Depending on the available equipment specification in the vehicle, these systems come heated or unheated.
The wiper bearing is screwed to the body. The position of the wiper arm in relation to the windshield is established by way of the position of the wiper bearing relative to the windshield. The field of vision is established in combination with the wiper blade length and the wiping angle. The position of the wiper blades is defined by the angular position of the wiper bearings to the windshield and by applying additional torsion to the wiper arms. The aim is to incline the wiper arms laterally at their reversal points towards the wipe angle bisector. This helps the wiper blade elements to swivel into their new working position. This, in turn, reduces wiper blade wear and the reversing noise. Wiper blades The wiper blade holds the wiper blade element and guides it over the windshield. Essentially there are two different types: conventional wiper blades are standardized.
Conventional wiper blade Conventional wiper blade In conventional wiper blades the contact pressure is distributed by claw brackets . Low wear operation is achieved by compensating the play in the mountings and linkages. The tops of the center brackets are perforated to prevent blade liftoff at high speeds. In special cases, wind deflectors are integrated into the wiper arms or blades to press the blades against the windshield.
Jointless wiper blade: Jointless wiper blade The flat, jointless wiper blade .
An adapted, simplified connection to the wiper arm ensures a reliable attachment of the wiper blade when the wipers are in operation, and also allow easy replacement when required.
.
The two component element , made of synthetic rubber, consists of a specially hardened, abrasion resistant lip which merges into an extra soft spine. The soft spine ensures that the wiper element has optimum reversing characteristics and wipes smoothly.
Rain sensor The rain sensor detects how heavy the rain is, and converts this data into an appropriate signal that is sent to the wiper drive. This is automatically switched on and, depending on the requirement, operated in the intermittent setting or in setting 1 or setting 2. The full potential of the rain sensor is fully realized with an electronically controlled wiper system, whose wiping speed can be infinitely re adjusted to the rain intensity.
Rear wiper systems Function and requirements Rear wiper systems are used when the rear window, on account of its sloping angle or the body shape, is prone to getting very dirty and rear visibility is compromised. The principle of rear window cleaning is generally the same as that for windshield cleaning systems.
A rear window cleaning system is subject to much lower demands than those of a front wiper system. The rear wiper system is therefore frequently operated in intermittent mode and its field of vision is not subject to any statutory requirements. The wiping angle typically ranges between 60deg and 180deg .
1 Bearing, 2 Magnet, 3 Armature, 4 Commutator with carbon brushes, 5 Helical gear, 6 Worm, 7 Oscillating mechanism, 8 Output shaft.
Rear wiper drives: Rear wiper drives are essentially no different from front wiper drives. A rear window wiper system is usually driven by an electric motor with integrated oscillating mechanism, which assumes the function of the linkage in front wiper systems and performs the oscillating movement of the output shaft . The wiper arm is directly attached to the output shaft of the wiper drive.
Windshield and rear window washer systems Design To ensure good cleaning, it is imperative that the wiper system is backed by a washer system. Electrically driven centrifugal pumps are used to direct water mixed with detergent additive from the washer fluid reservoir through nozzles in a pointed spray or through sprinkler nozzles as water mist onto the windshield . The capacity of the washer fluid reservoir is usually 1.5 to 2 l. If the same washer fluid reservoir is also used to supply the headlamp washers, a capacity of up to 7 l may be required. A separate reservoir may be provided for the rear window cleaning system.
Electronic control The washer system is often linked to the cleaning system by means of an electronic control system so that water is sprayed onto the rear window or windshield for as long as a pushbutton remains pressed. The wiper system then continues to operate for several additional cycles after the pushbutton is released.
1 Washer fluid reservoir, 2 Pump, 3 Non return valve, 4 T joint, 5 Nozzle holder for headlamp cleaning, 6 Tube, 7 Nozzles of windshield washer system, 8 Spray area, 9 Tube to left headlamp.
with nozzles integrated in the wiper arm. 1 Washer fluid reservoir, 2 Pump, 3 Wiper blade with spray holes  integrated in the wiper blade, 4 Tube.
Headlamp cleaning systems: Pure washer systems have become established for cleaning headlamps. The advantages of the headlamp washer system over the previously used wiper systems lie in its simple design and in the fact that it is easier to adapt to the vehicle styling concept.
A headlamp washer system is prescribed by law in Germany for xenon headlamps to prevent oncoming traffic from being dazzled by light diffusion. Design High pressure washer systems with one or more nozzles. As well as fixed nozzle holders on the bumpers, there are also telescopically extending nozzle holders. The telescope improves the cleaning effect because it can assume an optimum spray position. In addition, when not in use, the nozzle holder can be concealed, e.g., inside the bumper.
Cleaning effect The cleaning effect is chiefly determined by the cleaning pulse of the water jet. The decisive factors here are the distance between the nozzles and the headlamp lens, the size, the contact angle, the contact velocity of the washer fluid droplets, and the amount of washer fluid. It is important that the nozzles be positioned correctly so that water jets properly cover the headlamps at all driving speeds.
Climate control requirements: The system for controlling the climate in the passenger compartment of automobiles and commercial vehicles must fulfill many functions. Firstly, it must create a comfortable climate for all the occupants. To this end, cooled or heated air is fed into the passenger compartment so as to meet the physiological needs of the occupants. A further function of climate control is to keep the passenger compartment free of unpleasant odors and pollutants.
Climate control also has the safetyrelated function of demisting and de icing the windshield and side windows. Statutory requirements that vary from country to country must be met.
The comfort requirements and thus the functions of the A/C unit normally increase with the vehicle category. Regionally different climate control requirements must also be taken into consideration. In Europe, for instance, vehicles with a system of climate control which is as unobtrusive as possible are preferred, whereas in the USA a cool, noticeable air current is desired.
Design and operating principle of the A/C unit Air intake The A/C unit is installed out of sight of the occupants under the vehicle's instrument panel. Fresh air is usually drawn in at the base of the windshield through a second air inlet. The proportions of fresh air and recirculated air from the drawn in air are controlled by flaps.
1 Fan, 2 Vent flaps, 3 Temperature blending flap, 4 Air vent, 5 Electric heater , 6 Radiator, 7 Evaporator, 8 Filter.
a Fresh air, b Air vent,  windows  , c Air vent,  ventilation, d Air vent,  footwell, e Condensate drain, f Recirculated air.
cold and thus dry fresh air must some : times be used to prevent the windows from misting over due to condensation of damp passenger compartment air.
Air cleaning To clean the air, a sheet of filter fleece is pleated, i. e. folded, and preferably installed in the shape of a rectangular filter element before and after the fan in the A/C unit. The filter element is mainly positioned in such a way as to filter not only the fresh air, but also the recirculated air. The filter element has a limited retention capacity and must therefore be replaced. An activated carbon layer can also be applied to the filter fleece  in order to filter out particulates and pollutants.
Air cooling The cleaned air is then cooled on the surface of an evaporator, which is now usually made entirely of aluminum. The air dissipates its energy proportionally to the evaporating refrigerant which is routed through the evaporator.
Because cold air can absorb less moisture than warm air, water is separated out as it cools and routed downwards along the evaporator. The water collects in the housing section under the evaporator, the condensate drip pan, and is discharged via the condensate outlet from the A/C unit to the atmosphere.
Air temperature regulation  and distribution After the evaporator the desired air temperature is set by a blending flap system. To this end, the air is directed entirely or in part through a radiator and "Windows" vent levels, generating temperature stratification of up to 15 K. The volume of air blowing out of the  individual vents is continuously adjustable to any proportion by hand or by motordriven vent flaps.
In further expansion stages of the A/C unit additional vents can be provided for the rear passengers or temperature regulation of the passenger compartment can be set differently for different seats. The first expansion stage is two zone temperature regulation. The interior temperatures on the driver and front passenger sides can be set independently of one another. Three zone climate control caters for the rear seat area as an additional climate zone, while fourzone climate control provides for individual climate control for driver, front passenger and two passengers in the back.
A new feature is individual adaptation of the footwell temperature, or "variable stratification". In this case, the outlet temperature in the footwell can be increased while the basic setting remains unaltered .
Booster heater In modern optimized consumption internalcombustion engines the waste heat available in the engine coolant is reduced, and thus with it the heat supply in the heating circuit. In this case, an electric PTC booster heater is installed in the air passage after the radiator. By using PTC ceramic heating elements , the booster heater automatically reduces its heat output at a defined limit temperature, since the resistance of the PTC elements increases abruptly. The PTC booster heater is therefore intrinsically safe.
The utilization of further heat sources, such as heat recovery from exhaust gas for example, is currently being developed. Air routing The temperature regulated air is directed through plastic blow channels to the relevant vents. Window and footwell outlets are not adjustable. The blow direction and the air volume can be individually  adjusted at the air vents.
Supplementary A/C units: In luxury class vehicles supplementary A/C units are sometimes use for the rear passengers. These are designed either, like the main A/C units, as heater coolers or as pure coolers, and are usually supplied with recirculated air. Supplementary A/C units are installed, for example, in the center console, above the rear wheel arch, in the spare wheel recess, or behind the rear seat bench.
Alternative A/C unit concepts The A/C unit described above sets the desired temperature by blending cold and warm air and represents the standard design used today. Alternative A/C unit concepts may be used in which the air after the evaporator is routed directly through the radiator. A valve can be used to steplessly adjust the water flow rate through the radiator and thus the desired level to which the air flowing through is heated. The blending flap system for blending cold and warm air is omitted.
Because of the thermal inertia of the water filled aluminum radiator, desired changes to the air outlet temperature can only be completed slowly. To ensure that the passenger compartment is quickly cooled with the maximum air mass, these concepts normally utilize an additional airside bypass past the radiator.
The advantage of this concept is the slightly more compact design of the A/C unit and the possibility of shutting off the  radiator on the water side and thus avoid the unwanted situation of the air being heated in cooling mode by hot components in the A/C unit. The disadvantage is the expense of integrating a water valve.
Regulation of climate control The climate of the passenger compartment is controlled by making inputs at the A/C operating unit, by adjusting the air vents and in more luxurious vehicles by means of various sensors. The variations range from direct mechanical activation of the A/C unit via Bowden cables and flexible shafts to fully automatic, processorcontrolled air conditioning, where only the desired temperature is set.
The variables that can be influenced are blow out temperature, air flow rate, air moisture, and air distribution to the different vents. The secondary variables are interior temperature including temperature stratification, air flow, acoustics at each seat, and misting status of the windows.
Most people find the following configurations pleasant: in summer mode cold air from the vents in the instrument panel, in winter mode warm air from the footwell and defrost vents , and in transition mode, heated air in variable proportions from the defrost, footwell and ventilation vents in the passenger compartment. Additional influencing factors can play a part in automatic air conditioning. The status and intensity of the Sun can be determined by solar sensors and included in the control operation. Air quality sensors detect pollutants and odors in the ambient air and prevent them from entering the passenger compartment by closing the fresh air inlets. Moisture sensors for the windshield enable action to be taken to prevent imminent window misting. The desired and actual passenger compartment temperatures are compared by of temperature sensors.
Climate control systems: Heating circuit The waste heat from the engine is a source of energy which can be utilized without great expenditure to heat the passenger compartment. The hot coolant flows through the radiator in the A/C unit. The air passing through the radiator is heated. In order to maintain the interior temperature in winter after a journey when the engine is switched off, it is possible to use an electric water pump, which forwards the coolant and makes the heat stored in the cooling system usable.
Refrigerant circuit The function of the refrigerant circuit is to absorb the thermal energy of the air to be cooled in the evaporator and dissipate it at another point, outside the passenger compartment, to atmosphere. This is effected by using the cold loss process in a closed refrigerant circuit . The main components of this circuit are the evaporator with expansion valve in the A/C unit, the condenser at the front of the  vehicle, usually mounted directly in front of the coolant radiator, and the compressor secured to the engine block and driven by the engine.
The components are connected by metallic pipes which can contain flexible sections for decoupling. The compressor draws the gaseous refrigerant from the evaporator and compresses it, i. e. the pressure and temperature levels are greatly increased. In the condenser the hot refrigerant dissipates heat to the ambient air flowing through the condenser. This cooling condenses the vapor state refrigerant. If the air stream is not enough to cool the refrigerant  sufficiently, the radiator fan increases the air flow rate through the condenser. The  refrigerant now in liquid form and under high pressure is atomized in the expansion valve and directed to the evaporator. The pressure level drops suddenly, as a result of which the refrigerant is highly cooled as it evaporates, and absorbs the heat of the air to be cooled in the A/C unit. The evaporated refrigerant exits the evaporator in gaseous form and passes the expansion valve again, which, on the basis of the pressure and the temperature of the exiting refrigerant, alters the throttling cross section on the inlet side so as to inject into the evaporator just that amount of refrigerant that can evaporate in the current operating state.
In order to prevent ice from forming on : the air side of the evaporator, which would  reduce the evaporator air cross section, the minimum air temperature must not drop below 0 degC. To measure the air temperature after the evaporator, either an air temperature sensor is used which regulates the compressor accordingly if the temperature drops below a fixed level, or the minimum intake pressure and thus the evaporator temperature are limited in the compressor. The refrigerant output can be adjusted between zero kilowatts .
Refrigerant The fluorocarbon 1,1,1,2 Tetrafluorethane, which goes by the trade name R134a, is used as the refrigerant for vehicles with homologation before 2011 01 01 or vehicles where an existing type approval has been expanded .
Because of this refrigerant's GWP  of approx. 1,400 and the statutory provision which will come into force in Europe in 2011, which prescribes a refrigerant with a GWP of less than 150 for new vehicle models, an alternative refrigerant must be used here. There is currently still a lively debate regarding applicability of the alternative refrigerants. 2,3,3,3 Tetrafluoropropene with the trade name R 1234yf and carbon dioxide with the trade name R 744 are being pursued as alternatives. Starting at 2017 01 01 in Europe, all newly approved passenger cars must use a refrigerant with a GWP of less than 150.
Climate control for hybrid and electric vehicles In vehicles with an engine start/stop function, it is necessary to keep the interior  climate constant when the engine is switched off. For heating, an electric water pump can be used to utilize the residual heat from the engine circuit. For cooling, evaporators have been developed with a cold accumulator on the basis of a material which can store cold by means of a phase change and dissipate it again when stopped at traffic lights with the engine switched off. The interior climate can thus be kept at a pleasant level for up to two minutes.
In vehicles which run partly or entirely on electricity, a compressor is used which is electrically powered. Two solutions are available for heating. Either the water required for the radiator is electrically heated and supplied to the circuit by an electric pump, or the radiator is replaced by an electric heating element, the high voltage PTC. Electric heater and electric compressor also open up the possibility of independent climate control. When the battery is sufficiently charged or connected to a charging station, the vehicle can be both preheated and precooled.
Because the power required for climate control can amount to several kilowatts and thus the range of an electric vehicle is reduced significantly, current developments are focused on increasing the efficiency of climate control.
Cabin filters: Function Heating and air conditioning systems in motor vehicles draw in air from the outside. After conditioning, the air passes into the passenger compartment together with any particles or gaseous pollutants it may contain. These air pollutants  can cause allergic reactions. Therefore, it makes sense to filter out particles and gases. A filter also reduces the amount of dirt that builds up on the fan, in the heating system, on the instrument panel, and on the inside of the windshield.
Depending on the requirement, either particle filters, charcoal filters, or biofunctional filters are used. Charcoal filters have the advantage that, besides filtering out particles, they can also prevent unpleasant odors from entering the passenger compartment. This is achieved by carefully embedding activated charcoal granules  on the particle filter medium to eliminate aromatic substances. The activated charcoal also adsorbs ozone, benzene, and toluene, for instance. Biofunctional filters are furthermore used to prevent the growth of bacteria and to retain allergenic proteins.
Filter media Whereas in the past filter media were primarily paper based, the situation has now changed as a result of the greater demands placed on the filter system . Present day filter media generally consist of polyester or polypropylene based nonwoven materials. The particle filter consists of three graduated fiber layers: the preliminary filter, the microfiber nonwoven layer with electrostatically spun microfibers, and the base nonwoven material. An activated charcoal filter also has an activated charcoal layer in addition to the three fiber layers. In a biofunctional filter a special coating on the filter medium provides the biofunctional effect. When the filter material is made into a filter, a number of specific parameters must be considered. There is a complex interrelationship between the filter material used, the depth of the filter element folds, and the distance between the folds. The interaction between these parameters is important in determining the filter performance in service.
Design Cabin filters must be optimized in three areas: filtration efficiency, pressure loss, and dust storage capacity. The specifics of the application determine which of these three considerations is given precedence. The best filter may, for example, be a filter that achieves the highest possible filtration efficiency at the expense of a tradeoff in the filter service life. Another filter design may be one where a long service life is achieved by a high dust storage capacity at a defined level of filtration.
The service life of filters used in passenger cars is around 20,000 km, i.e. with today's servicing intervals, they are replaced each time the car is taken for a scheduled service.
in road traffic 0.01 0 Particle size 0.1 1 10 100 Pollen Street dust Abrasion debris Exhaust particulates and industrial dust Spores Bacteria Soot Fog, mist Vapor m m UKH0376 1E
cooling water and are thus suitable both for preheating engines and for heating the passenger compartment via the vehicle's heat exchanger with blower.
Air heaters are particularly efficient due to the direct transfer of heat to the air and are suitable for long periods of heating. Coolant heaters use the cooling circuit and the vehicle's existing air ducts and are therefore particularly suitable for covering the heat deficit of low consumption drives and for preheating the passenger compartments and engines of passenger cars.
Of increasing importance is their use in passenger cars with deficient heat output from waste heat caused by increased drivetrain efficiency by means of electrification. Particularly in plug in hybrid vehicles but also in purely battery powered vehicles fuel powered heaters, on account of their great efficiency in converting chemically bound energy into heat, ensures that the range in electric driving mode is not limited in the case of the storage capacity of the traction batteries being specified.
Air heaters Application Application Air heaters are primarily used in trucks and commercial vehicles. Their main advantages are low costs, faster installation, and lower power and fuel consumption. A dramatic increase in their use was witnessed in the USA with the introduction of legislation prohibiting the running of the engine to provide heat during breaks in driving since heaters can heat the cabs with clearly lower fuel consumption.
Operating principle Operating principle Air heaters to the burner, where it mixes with combustion air, is ignited by a sheathed element glow plug, and burns. The heating air blower draws in the fresh air to be heated, blows it through a heat exchanger, and into the vehicle cabin. In cold countries a heat output of approx. 4 kW is required. In temperate climates units with approx. 2 kW are sufficient.
An important safety aspect is that combustion air and exhaust gas from the cabin air must be kept entirely separate. This prevents exhaust gas from entering the cabin.
The heat output is regulated by varying the quantity of fuel, combustion air and fresh air. If the temperature measured by the room temperature sensor deviates from what is set at the operating element  and switches off in good time if necessary. A flame sensor determines by means of the heat exchanger temperature whether the burner has ignited and detects when the flame goes out.
Installation: Installation Air heaters for commercial vehicles can usually be fitted directly inside the cab. In trucks, for instance, the preferred locations are in the co driver's footwell, on the rear cab wall, under the bunk bed, on the outside of the cab wall, or in a stowage compartment. The exhaust pipe always runs under the floor .
Most sensor units in the fuel tanks of passenger cars and trucks already have a connection available for supplying fuel to the air heater. If necessary, an extra tank sensor unit is fitted. A fuel reserve for driving is guaranteed by the immersion depth of the fuel tank extraction fittings or the vehicle electronics, which switches off the heater from a minimum fill level.
Coolant heaters Application Application Coolant heaters up to approx. 5 kW heating capacity are used both in passenger cars and in trucks. They use the cooling circuit and already existing heat exchangers to heat the engine and cabin, as well as the available fans, air ducts, flaps, and vents. They are thus easy to retrofit. Heaters up to approx. 12 kW are used in trucks to preheat the engine. The large body surface area and high interior volume of city and tour buses mean that they require heating capacities of up to 35 kW.
1 Heating air blower, 2 ECU, 3 Combustion air blower, 4 Sheathed element glow plug,  5 Heat exchanger, 6 Combination sensor ,  9 Button, 10 Room temperature sensor, 11 Fuse holder, 12 Electric motor, 13 Burner, 14 Metering pump, 15 Exhaust muffler. F Fresh air from vehicle cabin, W Hot air to vehicle cabin, A Exhaust gas, B Fuel, V Combustion air.
1 Internal combustion engine, 2 Non return valve, 3 Thermostat, 4 Water pump,  5 Coolant heater, 6 Vehicle heat exchanger with blower, 7 Return flow from vehicle engine, 8 Return flow from heat exchanger, 9 Connection to heater. Separation by thermostat and non return valve into small water circuit .
connect them in series between the en : gine and the heat exchanger in the primary circuit . This offers, irrespective of the engine, the advantage of being able to use the heating also for short distance service without discharging too much the starter battery, which during the starting phase powers the glow element, the burner fan, the water pump, and the metering pump. Flow passes through the engine only after the thermostat opens when a high water temperature is reached. The non return valve prevents the circuit from being bypassed via the thermostat.
The water pump dissipates the heat. The heated air is blown controllably through the existing ventilation system into the vehicle cabin.
1 Water pump, 2 Combustion air motor, 3 Fan wheel, 4 Glow element, 5 Temperature sensor,  6 Burner, 7 Temperature sensor, 8 Heat exchanger,  9 Web based operating elements , 10 Exhaust muffler, 11 Flame sensor, 12 Fuel connection, 13 Plug in connection, blower flap control module, 14 ECU, 15 Connection to heater, 16 Pot strainer, fitted in metering pump, 17 Metering pump, 18 Combustion air muffler, 19 Water pump connection, A Exhaust gas, B Fuel, C Diagnosis connection, D Blower flap control module, V Combustion air, WA Water outlet, WE Water inlet.
UKH0381 1Y 1 2 5 6 7 8 9 9 9 3 4 WE WA WA WE D A B V 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 11 10 C
Control for manual immediate operation : and for preprogramming switch on times and heating duration is performed via radio remote control, via the Internet for example by means of a smart phone app, or via a menu in the vehicle's own A/C operator unit.
Booster heaters for covering heat deficits Booster heaters for covering heat deficits while driving while driving Efficiency optimized drivetrains, such as highly turbocharged diesel and gasoline engines with small displacements and hybrid drives, generate on account of their efficiency insufficient waste heat to heat the passenger compartment.
When used in an electric vehicle or in a plug in hybrid vehicle, the fuel powered heater can cover the entire heat demand. Installation Installation To avoid heat losses through long cooling water hoses, coolant heaters are usually installed in the engine compartment. The confined installation conditions necessitate a very compact construction. Installation is simplified by integrating all the components required to generate and deliver heat in the heater unit . Regulations Regulations All auxiliary heaters and booster heaters run on fuel have type approval in accordance with ECE Regulations No. 10 .
If a heater with this type approval is retrofitted in line with the manufacturer's installation instructions, no inspection/ approval by an expert or inspection body is prescribed. The installation of auxiliary heaters in vehicles used for international transport of hazardous goods is governed by the European ADR agreement is switched on.
________________________________ References References ECE R 10: Regulation No. 10 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to electromagnetic compatibility.
 ECE R 122: Regulation No. 122 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations Uniform technical provisions concerning the approval of vehicles of categories M, N and O with regard to their heating systems.
lift drive turns a cable reel, which operates a flexible cable mechanism. Systems with two guide rails are used for the most part in front doors. Systems with one guide rail are preferred in rear doors. A crucial advantage of these  designs is their excellent ability to guide the window glass.
many power window drives are equipped with an ECU. The gearing is designed as a helical bevel gear to create the necessary self inhibiting effect which prevents the window from opening inadvertently of its own accord or being opened by force. Special tribological measures and the magnetic circuit configuration of the DC motor further improve the drive's selfinhibiting properties. Space limitations inside the door make narrow drive units imperative.
Dampers integrated in the gearing mechanism provide good damping characteristics at the window glass end positions. Electronic control unit Two different operating modes are used. In manual mode the power window drive is operated using a switch which is pressed over the full extent of window travel. In automatic mode the window glass is opened or closed by a short pressing of the switch.
a) Arm window lift, b) Flexible cable window lift. 1 Power window drive, 2 Guide rail, 3 Driver, 4 Rod linkage, 5 Drive cable , 6 Quadrant gear.
the DC motor's direction of rotation is  immediately reversed. The window closing force, measured for a spring rate of 10 N/mm, must not exceed 100 N. To be able to close the window safely, the forcelimitation device is automatically deactivated before the window glass enters the door seal. The window position is monitored over its entire range of movement. Depending on the vehicle topology, the electronic control may be accommodated in a central ECU or decentrally in the door, preferably directly in the power window drive. Decentralized electronics can be networked via a LIN bus interface. The advantages of such a solution are fault diagnosis of the electronics and reduction of the amount of wiring.
This system utilizes up to three sliding sunroof drives with different adjustment options .
is tilted and then moved to the rear over the roof skin . Power sunroof drives Sunroofs and roller sun blinds are primarily adjusted by means of torsionand pressure resistant control cables or plastic toothed straps with mechatronic drives. These are located in the roof between the windshield and the sliding sunroof or at the rear of the vehicle.
In the event of an electric adjustment failure, the sunroofs can be closed by means of a hand crank provided on the drive.
The drive consists of a permanent field DC motor with helical gear drive, a power output of approximately 30 W and an ECU. The motor is protected against thermal overload by software thermal protection. Electronic control The electronic control system operates with a microcomputer responsible for evaluating incoming signals and monitoring sliding sunroof position.
Control is provided by means of exact position pulses. The pulses come from the ring magnet , which is mounted on the motor armature. They are sensed and evaluated by two Hall effect switches. As well as exact positioning, it is also possible to effect closing force limitation in order to avoid injuries during automatic operation when both opening and closing.
The drive is actuated via external signal inputs using pushbuttons, switches, and analog or digital preselector switches .
Control can be integrated in the vehicle's bus system .
operating facility 1 Sliding roller sun blind, 2 Fixed or sliding glass panel in rear area, 3 Sliding glass panel in front area, 4 Operating unit.
Electrical seat adjustment: On the one hand, the electrical seat adjustment ensures greater operating convenience than mechanical operation, and, on the other hand, it is also preferred on account of its lower space requirement or in the case of poor accessibility of the various adjustment planes.
The four main adjustment planes feature longitudinal adjustment of the full seat, tilt adjustment of the seat backrest, and height and tilt adjustment of the seat cushion.
Drives Electric motors with different gear variants are used are used as drives for electrical adjustment.
To simplify entry and exit, the drives can be designed in such a way that adjustment is completed particularly quickly . This function is particularly useful for gaining access to the second row in a two door vehicle.
Position detection Drives with position detection are increasingly being used to enable the seat position to be stored individually for different drivers and to retrieve and adjust this position .
Further adjustment options Aside from the four main adjustment planes for the driver and the front passenger, a wide range of additional adjustments can be performed electrically such as seat cushion depth, head restraint, and lumbar support.
Electrical adjustments are increasingly also being performed for the second and third seat rows in larger vehicles . A significant motivation for this is to make it much easier and more convenient to load larger objects.
seat adjustment 1 Electric motor for longitudinal adjustment of the seat , 4 Electric drive for tilt adjustment of the seat cushion, 5 Electric drive for tilt adjustment of the seat backrest, a Tilt adjustment of the seat cushion, b Longitudinal adjustment of the full seat, c Height adjustment of the seat, d Tilt adjustment of the seat backrest. UKP0009Y 3 4 1 2 5 a b c d
Electrical steering wheel : adjustment A further comfort and convenience function which is often combined with electrical seat adjustment is electrical steeringwheel adjustment. Here both the longitudinal clearance and the height of the steering wheel can be infinitely adjusted via a drive similar to the spindle drives for seat adjustment.
This function is particularly useful in combination with the memory function. In this way, for example, entry and exit are made easier by extending the clearance between the driver's seat and the steering wheel prior to entry and exit. During driving the positions of the seat and steering wheel adjustments individually preprogrammed for the driver are set.
Phases of vehicle safety: Vehicle safety can be broken down into the categories of active safety and passive safety. Active safety systems help to prevent an accident. Passive safety systems are used when an actual accident occurs.
driving, in which safety systems issue warnings, provide recommendations, or make corrections .
Different safety systems are available, depending on the vehicle equipment. Owing to its effectiveness in accident avoidance, driving dynamics control for example has established itself in all vehicle classes and has been required by law in Europe since 2012 for newly registered vehicles.
ample by means of a seat occupancy mat .
Child seats Child seats The use of child seats is required by law. Provisions also stipulate that the front passenger airbag must be deactivated if a rear facing child seat is placed on the front passenger seat .
Critical situation: If a critical situation ensues for example in response to full braking or in the event of braking on a different surface, targeted brake interventions on individual wheels and interventions in the engine management bring about a stabilization of the vehicle . The braking effect starts earlier once the brake pedal is pressed, resulting in a shorter braking distance.
Before the crash For improvement of the deployment function of the occupant protection systems and advance detection of the type of impact . Electromechanical reversible seat belt pretensioners are used with pre crash sensing. The fact that they are reversible means that in a dangerous situation they can already be tightened prior to a possible collision. In this way, belt slack is already eliminated before the crash, enabling the occupants already at an early stage to participate in the vehicle's deceleration during a braking operation.
During the crash The crash starts at t0, the moment of first vehicle contact and if necessary emergency braking is initiated; this is intended to avoid a potential secondary accident or to mitigate the accident severity.
After the crash Event Data Recorder Event Data Recorder Vehicles with airbag systems store data relevant to the accident, e.g., impact accelerations, belt buckle states or airbag deployment times, in a non volatile memory of the airbag ECU . The volume of data varies depending on the vehicle manufacturer and records a period of around 100 ms before and after the impact.
This enables the accident to be analyzed to a certain extent. For example, accidents with airbag deployment can be distinguished from near accidents and also accidents without airbag deployment. For another thing, the data permit a partial reconstruction of the vehicle situation before the accident for accident research purposes. In addition, statutory requirements are thereby fulfilled. Thus, in the USA the use of an event data recorder in new vehicles has been required by law since 2012.
eCall eCall eCall is an automatic emergency call system for motor vehicles prescribed by the European Union which since April 2018 has been required to be installed in all new models of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles.
The airbag ECU activates, aside from hazard warning lights, door openers, deactivation of the fuel pump, and isolation of the battery, an emergency call via a carphone installed in the vehicle. The emergency call center automatically receives information on the exact location of the vehicle and can if necessary talk to the occupants and initiate recovery and rescue operations.
Active safety: The aim of active safety is already in advance to prevent an accident from happening. The level of technical vehicle equipment helps to recognize dangers quickly in normal driving conditions and to avoid accidents. Active safety therefore already begins with a good view of the road traffic even at dusk/dawn and at night. The range of vision was virtually doubled when Bilux lights were replaced by halogen lamps in the 1970s. The introduction of xenon and LED headlights were further milestones. Well conceived operating concepts e.g. for the infotainment system via the multifunction steering wheel and the depiction of information in a head up display enable the driver to keep their eyes on the road and the traffic. Even this is a contribution to active safety.
In the field of driver assistance the brake booster and power steering for example offer the potential to avoid accidents. But active road safety also includes the driver's driving qualifications , their traffic literacy and competence, their traffic appropriate behavior, and their own responsible actions and initiative.
But, generally speaking, active safety refers to systems which actively intervene in the driving dynamics and thus actively support the driver. These systems are also called driver assistance systems. Examples of active safety systems Active safety systems require information about the vehicle's driving and operating state . The advances in sensor technology led to the development of numerous active safety systems.
1978 saw the introduction of the first antilock braking system , in which the antilock braking system and the traction control system are integrated and which additionally detects the vehicle's swerving/skidding tendency and counteracts this tendency with targeted wheel individual brake interventions and interventions in the engine management.
Adaptive Cruise Control , initially developed as a comfort and convenience system, has developed further in the direction of an active safety system. It relieves the strain on the driver by automatically adapting the speed to the vehicle traveling in front and where necessary brakes the vehicle to a standstill. In this way, the safety distance is constantly maintained. Emergency Brake Assist performs an emergency braking operation if it detects an object in front of the vehicle.
Lane Keeping Support warns the driver for example by vibrating the steering wheel if the vehicle leaves the lane without a turn signal having been activated. If the driver fails to react, the system can automatically steer the vehicle back to the original lane.
Blind spot assistants and lane change assistants monitor the areas to the sides of and behind the vehicle and warn the driver when a vehicle is approaching. These systems thus warn when a passing  maneuver cannot be safely carried out.
Importance of active safety Safety in motor vehicles was previously confined to passive safety. Occupant protection systems have in the meantime become a matter of course; advances in these systems are more likely to occur in the background. Active safety systems are constantly subject to further development and new systems are always arriving. They are deployed initially in premium vehicles and then also appear in the lower vehicle classes. New active safety systems are vigorously promoted by the vehicle manufacturers.
Passive safety: Passive safety in a car increases occupant protection in the actual event of an accident. There are 150 milliseconds which decide in the event of a car accident whether the outcome remains confined to damage to property or escalates to serious injuries to the occupants. If an accident occurs, numerous vehicle components can be crucial to survival. From the passenger safety cell extending across a stable body, crumple zone, energy absorbing steering column and headrests through to airbags and seat belts with belt pretensioners , passive safety is aimed at mitigating the consequences of an accident. Many of these components are required by law and are therefore standard equipment in the vehicle.
Whereas active safety aims at avoiding an impending accident entirely, passive safety is intended to mitigate the consequences of an unavoidable accident. By linking with driver assistance and active safety, new enhanced passive safety functions provide for more comprehensive occupant protection .
The airbag ECU collects information on the speed, temperature, belt buckle states, the seating position of the occupants, and registers activation of the ignition. Diagnoses, driving states, and accidents are recorded in the vehicle and stored in an event recorder. Data can be read via the diagnosis connector and if necessary software updates can be performed.
SKT0063 2E Carphone Display FlexRay CAN LIN PSI5 Diagnosis connector Airbag ECU with inertial sensors Radar sensors Bus systems Pedestrianprotection sensors 36 firing circuits for the restraint systems and emergency deactivations Upfront sensors... Seating position sensors Switches Seat belt buckles Side impact sensors Passenger detection  Drivingdynamics control system Chassis tuning shock absorber Vehicle electrical system management Engine management
even brake and steering systems can be : activated with these signals to optimize and stabilize the vehicle in terms of driving dynamics.
The information already in the lead up to a crash e.g., on the relative speed, moment of impact of potential collision objects comes from a radar, lidar or video sensor system. This enables seats or reversible belt pretensioners for example to be preconditioned for the crash situation or warning signals to be issued.
The vehicle electrical system management uses the signals from the airbag ECU to control the airbag warning lamps, the status of the seat belts and seat occupancy, the hazard warning lights, and emergency door opening.
An emergency call is sent via the carphone in the event of a crash; there is also the possibility of communicating information on medical treatment to the emergency services in advance. The engine management switches off the fuel pump after a crash; if necessary, the battery is isolated.
Legal regulations and consumer tests Legal regulations Requirements with regard to passive safety in vehicles are laid down in legislation. These cover safety of drivers, passengers, and in particular children and pedestrians.
Safety requirements laid down in the EU are for example the provisions pertaining to head onand side impact protection for the vehicle occupants and pedestrian protection. These are reflected in UN/ECE regulations, which apply to the EU but have in the meantime also be adopted by many non European countries. Other countries follow these regulations to a large extent .
The USA has the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards , which constitute the technical regulations pertaining to vehicle safety and are legislative in character.
Consumer tests The country specific NCAP is intended to provide car buyers and car manufacturers with a realistic and independent assessment of the safety features of some of the biggest selling vehicles. Standardized crash and rollover tests of vehicles are conducted for this purpose. The vehicles are occupied by dummies during the crash tests. The safety assessment is derived from the measured values recorded on the dummies. To assess the safety of child seats, child dummies are placed in the child seats recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
Thus, Euro NCAP is a voluntary European : program for assessing vehicle safety which is supported by the European Commission and a number of European governments, and by automobile clubs and consumer organizations. Euro NCAP publishes safety reports on new cars and awards a star rating, based on the performance of the vehicles in various crash tests, including head on, side and pole impact and collisions with pedestrians . The highest rating is five stars. The requirements imposed on the star rating increase in parallel with vehicle development so that a 5 star car ten years ago is not comparable with a 5 star car today.
The test conditions are constantly updated, the test program extended to include additional tests, and the assessment criteria tightened. More recent findings concerning accidents and their causes are reflected in new test condition requirements. Where originally only the results from the crash tests were used for assessment, assessments of active safety are increasingly being included in the overall assessment.
In the event of an accident, occupant pro : tection systems are intended to keep the accelerations and forces that act on the passengers low and thereby lessen the consequences of the accident.
Seat belts with belt pretensioners provide a substantial proportion of the protective effect, absorbing the majority of the kinetic energy of the occupants. Together with a front airbag, the energy in the crash must be reduced in such a way that the occupant is not propelled up against the steering wheel or the dashboard.
Functions Environment sensing The ECU detects the different types of impact with the aid of integrated acceleration sensors or structure borne noise sensors. From their signals the crash severity and crash type to be expected is determined so that the appropriate retention systems can be activated at the right time.
Peripheral acceleration and pressure sensors installed on the vehicle body are connected via leads to the ECU. They facilitate earlier detection of vehicle contact and hence improved performance with regard to deployment of the retention systems. Especially in the case of side impacts with a small crumple zone, high speed pressure sensors installed in the door have an advantage over acceleration sensors.
Rollover detection is performed by yaw and acceleration sensors. Aside from the yaw rate about the longitudinal axis, the vehicle lateral acceleration are sensed.
1 Airbag with gas inflator, 2 Passenger compartment camera, 3 OC mat , 5 Upfront sensor, 6 Central ECU for seat belt pretensioners, front and  side airbags, and rolloverprotection equipment with integrated rollover sensor, 7 iBolt, 8 Peripheral pressure sensor, 9 Seat belt pretensioner with propellant charge, 10 Peripheral acceleration sensor, 11 Bus architecture.
Activation of retention systems The sensor signals are evaluated by intelligent algorithms, the parameters of which are optimized specifically for individual vehicles with the aid of simulations and crash tests. The airbag should not trigger from a hammer blow in the workshop, gentle impacts, bottoming out, or driving over curbstones or potholes.
The retentions systems connect to the ECU are activated when the trigger thresholds are exceeded. Current pulses activate pyrotechnic firing elements, which trigger the airbags or other retention systems.
In the event that the power supply to the ECU is interrupted by the vehicle battery as a result of the crash, a built in power reserve provides the necessary availability. The firing of retention systems for the relevant seat occurs only when the seatbelt buckle is connected; this is monitored by a seat belt buckle switch.
Special functions Advanced Rollover Sensing Advanced Rollover Sensing The "Advanced Rollover Sensing" function uses signals from the driving dynamics control sensors to better detect soiltrip rollover processes. These data are used by the airbag ECU to calculate the speed vector and the lateral velocity. From these the deviation of the vehicle motion vector from the vehicle's longitudinal axis and thereby lateral vehicle motion are determined.
Early Pole Crash Detection Early Pole Crash Detection The "Early Pole Crash Detection" function also uses the signals from the driving dynamics control sensors to better detect a side on pole impact. In the event of a side on pole impact the vehicle skids before the impact; this is detected with the yaw sensor. The information regarding the lateral movement of the vehicle is then used in the triggering algorithm to accelerate triggering of the side airbags. Secondary Collision Mitigation Secondary Collision Mitigation In the event of accidents the initial collision may be followed by further collisions by the accident vehicle, for example as a result of the driver losing control of the vehicle. This phenomenon puts both the vehicle occupants and other road users at risk. The "Secondary Collision Mitigation" function provides assistance in the event of such accidents. If an impact occurs, the airbag ECU transmits this information to the driving dynamics control ECU. The driving dynamics control uses specifically targeted brake interventions to slow down the vehicle or where necessary to shut down the engine. Consequential accidents can thus be avoided or their severity reduced.
Further safety measures Further safety measures By networking driving dynamics control and airbag ECU, it is possible also to utilize the detection of unstable or critical states to initiate more specifically targeted safety measures. When an unstable driving state is detected, safety measures can be introduced in stages; these measures can include closing the windows and the sliding sunroof, and tightening a reusable motor driven seat belt pretensioner.
The standard type is the three point belt with inertia reel device. The belt buckle and the inertia reel device are mounted on the seat or on the body results in belt slack. The softness of the clothing prevents the occupant from being involved at an early stage in the deceleration of the vehicle in the event of a collision. The occupant initially continues moving without being restrained, which reduces the protective effect of the belt. Furthermore, the slowed down effect of the belt locking in an accident and the belt webbing elongation contribute to belt slack.
Because of belt slack three point inertia reel belts only afford limited protection in the event of a frontal impact at speeds in excess of 40 km/h against solid obstacles, because they cannot safely prevent the head and body from striking the steering wheel and the dashboard.
1 Inertia reel device with seat belt pretensioner, 2 Seat belt, 3 Front airbag for  front passenger, 4 Front airbag  for driver, 5 ECU.
forward displacement of an occupant at an impact speed of 50 km/h 1 Impact, 2 Firing of belt pretensioner and airbag, 3 Belt tensioned, 4 Airbag inflated.
Time t s s 0 20 40 60 80 ms 10 20 30 40 50 km/h 20 40 60 80 100 cm Speed u Occupant forward displacement s 1 2 3 4 u UKI0034 3E 3 1 4 5 2
ening the belt webbing. Here, the system : electrically fires a pyrotechnic propellant charge . The gas charge released in this process acts on a plunger, which turns the belt reel via a steel cable in such a way that it is held tightly against the occupant's body. The belt webbing is therefore tightened already before the occupant starts their forward movement. With these belt pretensioners the belt webbing can be pulled back within a period of 10 ms by up to 12 cm.
Electromechanically actuated belt pretensioners are reversible and can therefore already be activated early in a hazardous situation without there being a collision. Buckle tightener Buckle tightener When triggered by a propellant charge or by spring systems, the buckle tightener pulls the seat belt buckle back and simultaneously tightens the shoulder and lap belts. It improves the restraining effect and the protection to prevent occupants from sliding forward under the lap belt .
Combination of shoulder belt and buckle Combination of shoulder belt and buckle tighteners tighteners The combination of both systems offers greater tightener travel to obtain an improved restraining effect. The two tighteners are activated for the most part simultaneously or with a slight time lag.
Belt force limiter Belt force limiter The maximum force of the belt is limited in order to limit the forces on the occupant's torso in the event of serious crashes. Otherwise the occupant may suffer broken collarbones and ribs with resulting internal injuries.
This can on the one hand be performed by a mechanical belt force limiter, which limits the belt force to around 4 kN. This is effected for example by the deformation of a torsion bar in the belt retractor shaft or a deployment control seam in the belt. An additional protective effect is provided by an electronically controlled beltforce limiter, which after reaching a defined forward displacement reduces the belt force by activating a firing element to 1 to 2 kN.
Airbags and gas inflators Front airbags Front airbags During an accident front airbags protect the driver and the front passenger against head and chest injuries which can occur when the head strikes the steering wheel or the dashboard.
To perform this function, airbags have, depending on the installation location, type of vehicle, and structure deformation behavior of the vehicle body, different filling capacities and shapes adapted to the vehicle conditions.
protection, the airbag must be fully inflated before the occupant comes into contact with it. When the occupant comes into contact with the airbag, the airbag is partially deflated via deflation vents. The impact energy acting on the occupant is "softly" absorbed with noncritical surface pressures and deceleration forces.
injects and additional charge of air into the : airbag in the event of high crash severity. The maximum permitted forward motion of the driver until the airbag on the driver's side has inflated is approx. 12.5 cm. This corresponds to a time of approximately 40 ms in the case of an impact at 50 km/h on a hard obstacle. 10 ms after the impact the gas inflator is activated and after 30 ms the airbag is inflated. The airbag deflates after another 80 to 100 ms through the deflation vents. Depowered airbags Depowered airbags So as not to put children and very light adults on the front passenger seat at risk from the inflation process, "depowered airbags" with a reduced inflation force are used above all in the USA.
To this end, in less serious accidents at reduced speed up to around 30 km/h the airbags are inflated with 20 to 30 % less gas inflator output, reducing the inflation speed and the hardness of the inflated airbag. This reduces the risk of injury for occupants who are "out of position" .
With the low risk deployment method, depending on the severity of the impact, only the first front airbag stage is fired or else both inflator stages to bring the full gas inflator output to bear.
Airbags with active ventilation system Airbags with active ventilation system These airbags have a controllable deflation valve to maintain the internal pressure of the airbag constant even if an occupant falls against it and to minimize occupant trauma. A simpler version is an airbag with "intelligent vents". These vents remain closed until the pressure increase resulting from the impact of the occupant causes them to open and allow the airbag to deflate. As a result, the airbag's energy absorption capacity is fully maintained until the point at which its motion damping function comes into effect.
occupants together with the speed de : crease of the passenger cell. This ensures that the upper body and head describe the rotational forward motion which is needed for the airbag to provide optimum protection. Furthermore, the knee airbag prevents contact with the dashboard support and thereby reduces the risk of injury in this area.
Side airbags Side airbags Side airbags which inflate along the length of the roof lining for head protection  are designed in the event of a side impact to push the occupants away from the impact location and facilitate a cushioning of the impact and thereby protect them from injury.
The challenge for side airbags is the shorter time available for inflation compared with front airbags. Here there is no vehicle crumple zone and the spacing between the occupant and the vehicle body is very small. The time for crash sensing and activation of the side airbags must therefore be approximately 5 to 10 ms in the case of severe side impacts. The inflation duration for thorax bags may not exceed 10 ms.
Additional airbag equipment Additional airbag equipment A further improvement in the restraining effect is optionally provided in individual vehicles by airbags integrated in the thorax section of the seat belt , which reduce the risk of broken ribs.
Inflatable headrests protect against whiplash and cervical vertebrae injuries in the event of a rear end impact . Gas inflators Gas inflators The gas inflator fills the airbag with gas and actuates the belt pretensioner. The pyrotechnic gas inflator contains a firing pellet, which when activated in turn ignites a solid propellant. The gas passes through a metal filter and the inflator's outlet ducts into the airbag.
The firing pellet contains a reservoir holding the propellant charge and a priming wire. The firing pellet is connected to the airbag ECU via the connector pins and a two wire circuit. To trigger the airbag, the ECU uses firing output stages to generate a current, which flows inside the firing pellet through the priming wire. This wire glows and activates the propellant charge.
The driver airbag fitted in the steering wheel hub are inflated approximately 30 ms after firing.
1 Propellant charge, 2 Detonator, 3 Cap, 4 Charge holder, 5 Priming wire, 6 Firing head, 7 Housing, 8 Connector pins.
incur serious injury. To provide protection : in such cases, existing restraint systems such as seat belt pretensioners and side and head airbags are activated. In convertibles, the extendable rollover bars or the extendable head restraints are triggered.
A rollover is sensed in the vehicle transverse and vertical directions .
Depending on the rollover situation, yaw rate and lateral acceleration, the retention systems and actuators are activated and deployed after 30 to 3000 ms. Pedestrian protection Pedestrian protection This function is intended to avoid injuries as far as possible in the event of vehicles colliding with pedestrians. Leg and head injuries can be reduced by appropriate designs of bumpers and engine hood.
In addition, in a crash situation the hood can be lifted or an external airbag can cushion the impact is integrated in the bumper. Appropriate tests are an integral part for example of the Euro NCAP crash test.
These iBolts .
Seat occupancy mats Seat occupancy mats combined with pressure sensitive elements and matching sensor also perform this function . The information is sent to the ECU and incorporated in the triggering strategy for the means of protection. The seats can be adjusted when backrest angle and position are sensed with suitable actuators during the crash to better protect the occupants.
Deactivation of front passenger airbag A manually actuated deactivation switch can be used to disable the passenger airbag. This is required if certain child seats are used in this space.
There is an increasing availability of stan : dardized anchoring systems . Switches integrated in the anchoring locks initiate an automatic front passenger airbag deactivation, which must be indicated in the instrument cluster.
Out of position detection In order to prevent injuries being caused by airbags to occupants who are "out of position" , the triggering of the front airbag and its inflation must be adapted to the situation. Enhanced detection of the occupant position and adaptation of the retention systems and their activation are important for future automated driving, since the challenges faced by passive safety increase with the freedom of movement gained by the occupants.
a) Rest position, b) In operation, i.e., in overload stop. 1 Sliding base, 2 Sleeve, 3 Magnet holder, 4 Double bending beam , 5 Hall IC, 6 Seat frame.
Overview: The road to automated driving will be accompanied in the coming years by a marked increase in the market penetration of environment sensor systems. The development of new assistance and driving functions necessitated by the introduction of automated driving leads to the availability of additional information on vehicle, environment, and occupants. This extended and networked data basis permits the development of new integral safety concepts with the aim of adapting the vehicle's protective measures to the respective accident situation in the event of unavoidable accidents. Predictive situation analysis in particular facilitates safety measures for preventing accidents or lessening the accident severity. The networking of active and passive safety measures creates the precondition for situational adaptation of the vehicle's automatic protective responses to the respective accident events. Motivation It has been possible in the past few years through numerous measures in the automotive industry, traffic research and legislation to reduce the number of traffic fatalities and serious injuries. The fitting prescribed by law of all new passenger cars with driving dynamics control for motorcycles, and lanechange warning systems are mentioned by way of example. Numerous serious accidents still occur despite these measures .
Accident protection does not lose in importance even when it comes to automated driving. There is a need for action, since integral safety forms the fallback level of automated driving. The integral safety approach offers new solutions which will both take into account the individuality of the individual occupant and raise the traffic safety level through the networking of sensor and safety systems.
PRE SAFE: Activation e.g. of reversible belt pretensioners and seat. PreSet: Improved accident severity determination by means of environment sensor technology. SCM: Secondary Collision Mitigation; braking of vehicle after primary collision to avoid secondary collision.
CWS: Collision Warning System; activation of reversible belt pretensioners when leaving the road in the direction of an extreme surface. SAE1292 1E 2000 1970 Integral safety Passive safety Probability of not being injured Improvement of occupant safety 1980 1990 2010 2020 2030 Belt PreSet CWS... ? SCM PRE SAFE Active rollover protection Crumple zone Active belts Front airbag Side airbag Safety cell
Technology of the present day: Integral safety is based on the networking of components and algorithms of various safety and comfort and convenience systems in the vehicle . Here, the entire chain of events of an unavoidable accident before, during and after the collision is analyzed to minimize the risk of injury to vehicle occupants and other road users.
The first integral safety systems were launched in 2002 by Mercedes Benz under the name PRE SAFE in the S Class. Since 2009 the front close range radar sensors of the driver assistance package have also been used with this system to detect potential collision objects with preventive reversible seat belt tightening. In 2013 this principle was carried over to the vehicle rear end.
come visible in the accident statistics after a delay, as the rising equipment rate in new vehicle registrations is set against an old vehicle population.
cessing units only for the integral safety functions have not gained acceptance in the past for cost reasons, which hinders the introduction of independent integral safety systems.
The penetration times of integral safety systems will follow the market developments with regard to driver assistance, active safety, and automated driving. In the course of the introduction of automatic driving functions the equipment rate with environment and passenger compartment sensors and with domain ECUs will increase . The introduction of automatic driving functions will ensure the market introduction and market penetration of environment and passenger compartment sensors and of appropriate domain ECUs. At the same time, occupant protection faces hitherto unknown challenges as a result of these functions. Possible new seating positions,
shifting of the occupant positions during : automatic braking or steering operations or larger objects between occupants and airbags change the boundary conditions for the optimum use of retention systems in the event of a collision risk.
Even fundamental elements of present day vehicles, such as function and E/E architecture, undergo a development process in the course of developments in the fields of electromobility, automated driving, and connectivity. New requirements with regard to safety, communication speed, computing outlay, latencies, and costs drive this development process, which is also useful in the introduction of integral safety systems.
Application examples Accident types with Accident types with head on collision head on collision Head on accident scenarios as depicted in Figure 2 highlight an important sphere of activity for integral safety. The frequently occurring rear end collision can already today be firmly detected in terms of its development by the use of environment sensor technology. The growing number of vehicles which are equipped with an automatic emergency brake system will reduce the frequency and severity of this type of accident.
Intersection accidents with side collisions as pictured in Figure 2e constitute a further area of use for integral safety functions. Injury severity is frequently in the middle range. Intersection assistance systems with left turn off assist and cross traffic assist will greatly reduce the frequency of such accidents .
The introduction of Electronic Stability Programs, lane departure warning systems, and functions for detecting driver fatigue brought about a reduction of in collisions caused by the vehicle leaving the road . This accident type is nevertheless still very relevant today on account of the injury severity often associated with it.
Accidents involving oncoming vehicles exhibit a high injury probability . Active safety and automation measures prove to be the least effective in these accident scenarios. Integral safety is therefore focused on this accident type.
. In both cases the sensors installed in the supporting frame respond only at a relatively late stage after the body has undergone marked deformation.
Pre Crash Positioning The PCP function coordinates in scenarios depicted in Figure 2 automated emergency braking with the restraint system. The chronological sequences of forces acting on the occupants, braking operations, and activations of the retention systems must be matched in such a way as to minimize the load on the occupants. A first instance of this function serves to position the occupants at the right time in the phase prior to the collision by means of reversible seatbelt tightening.
Further developments Further developments Later versions of the IDF and PCP functions will, along similar lines to the further development of the automatic emergency brake systems, take into account more complex relationships. The first expansion stage handles the rear end impact using front sensor technology with the merging of radar and video. The same sensor configuration is used in the case of oncoming vehicles. However, this accident type requires the development of more complex decision algorithms and additional safeguarding effort to avoid bad decisions. Expansion to include intersection accidents necessitates the additional installation of Mid Range Radar with a very large side beam width.
Individual safety On account of legal regulations and consumer tests today's passive safety systems are optimized for certain occupant heights and weights. Adaptive retention systems combined with suitable activation offer the potential for raising the safety level also for occupants that deviate from the standard sizes used in the tests. One possible solution approach uses occupant specific variables such as age, height, weight or gender for the purpose of individually activating existing and future adaptive retention systems.
These data are acquired via passenger compartment sensor technology, supplemented by user inputs and plausibility checks. For example, the user enters once via his smart phone or an HMI integrated in the vehicle his personal data, which are linked with an image recorded by him. On each new entry into the vehicle a unique identification of the occupant is performed by means of passenger compartment camera and image processing algorithms with corresponding parameterization of the retention systems. If the occupant is not identified, the usual high safety level is still available in the default settings.
In view of the anticipated increase in the use of automatic and semi automatic driving functions, an increase in the number of passenger compartment cameras being installed is also to be expected. Personal optimization of the safety functions therefore does not require additional sensors. It is possible to fall back on passenger compartment sensor technology to be introduced to safeguard automated driving.
Safeguarding: A major challenge faced by integral safety functions is environment and passenger compartment sensing and correct situation assessment. As well as verifying correct functionality, particular attention is placed on safeguarding against unwanted false triggering of the retention systems. A typical situation that is to be avoided is the erroneous reporting of a collision object without such an object actually existing. A further scenario to be avoided is as follows: An object is correctly detected, however an erroneous trajectory computation suggests a collision course and activates retention systems although the object is actually driving past the system vehicle. Falling into the same category are driving situations in which an object on a collision course is correctly detected, but after retention systems have been triggered the collision is not avoided .
In spite of data fusion and the associated redundancy, there are complex situations whose detection and correct interpretation must be verified. To guarantee this, the testing of integral safety systems must record as wide a variety of real traffic situations as possible.
Testing of integral safety system according to today's methodology exceeds both the cost and the time framework for release in the automotive industry. A first step towards reducing expenditure while simultaneously guaranteeing safety is to break down the wide range of real situations into a limited number of simulated test track or laboratory situations which are representative of reality.
A supplementing approach is to use virtual instead of real test environments. Virtual test environments permit the evaluation of safety functions in the early development phase and thus fast prototype construction. Furthermore, they enable safeguarding of the functions to be developed in complex traffic situations that are hard to reproduce in real driving or test operation.
Outlook: Starting out from conventional vehicle safety with deployment of the airbags after an impact has been detected, the trend is towards adaptation of the trigger thresholds of retention systems on the basis of networked object data by environment sensors, passenger compartment sensors, and driving dynamics information. In this expansion stage of the integral safety systems only reversible protection systems will be activated prior to the collision.
Functions with activation of irreversible actuators exclusively on the basis of data from environment sensors will constitute the next development stage of integral safety .
_________________________________ References References T. Lich et al.: "Is there a broken trend in traffic safety in Germany? Model based approach describing the relation between traffic fatalities in Germany and environmental conditions", ESAR Conference, Hanover, Germany, 2014.
 J. Richert, R. Bogenrieder, U. Merz, R. Schoneburg: "PRE SAFE Impuls Seite Vorauslosendes Ruckhaltsystem bei drohendem Seitenaufprall Chance fur den Insassenschutz, Herausforderung der Umfeldsensorik", 10th VDI Conference Vehicle Safety Safety 2.0, Berlin, 2015.
 J. Becker, S. Kammel, O. Pink, M. Fausten: "Bosch's approach toward automated driving". at Automatisierungstechnik 2015; 63: 180 190.
 G. Gstrein, W. Sinz, W. Eberle, J. Richert, W. Bullinger: "Improvement of airbag performance through pre triggering". Paper Number 09 0229, Proceedings of 18th Enhanced Safety of Vehicles, ESV 21, Stuttgart, Germany, 2009.
 H. Freienstein, T. Engelberg, H. Bothe, R. Watts: "3 D Video Sensor for Dynamic Out of Position Sensing, Occupant Classification and Additional Sensor Functions". Paper No. 2005 01 1232, SAE World Congress 2005, Detroit, USA.
SAE1294 1E Time Increasing market penetration of environment and passenger compartment sensing Activation of restraint systems  before and during the accident Integrated activation of restraint systems Technology of the present day Complexity
1 Outer handle, 2 Outer handle plate, 3 Lock barrel  , 4 Outer locking rod, 5 Inner handle, 6 Bowden cable for inner handle, 7 Bowden cable for outer handle, 8 Retaining bracket, 9 Side door lock.
Access authorization: Standard Today's standard is represented by remote keys, which at the touch of a button by the user send a coded data packet at a UHF frequency . These data packets typically consists of a fixedcode part and a rolling code part which are generated according to an algorithm. The receiver decrypts this code with the same algorithm and thereby identifies permissible combinations. Each code can only be used once. Once the received data packet is identified as permissible, the locks are electrically unlocked and the vehicle owner can open the doors by pulling on the outer control. The mechanical key now only acts as an emergency actuator in the event of a remote key malfunction or a power failure.
Keyless entry So called passive entry or keyless entry access systems are becoming increasingly popular. These do not require any electrical unlocking action by the vehicle owner. It is enough for the owner to be carrying the ID transmitter about their person. A chip inserted in the remote key or a suitable smart phone can serve as the ID transmitter to the chip in the ID transmitter. The latter reacts to a UHF frequency with a range of up to 20 meters and sends back a coded reply sequence to the vehicle. Access is authorized and the doors are unlocked.
The opening speed is crucial to the user's comfort and convenience. Both the response time of the identification protocol and the unlocking of the doors must be so short that there is no waiting time. The user should not have to pull repeatedly on the outer door handle before the door opens. In a passive entry system the reply sequence also changes with each request so as to prevent "eavesdropping". However, a security risk is posed by so called "relay station attacks". In such attacks the range of the signals of vehicle and ID transmitter are extended with portable transmit/ receive stations. One of these devices must be close to the vehicle to be able to receive and boost the low frequency signal. In this way, the ID transmitter can also be scanned unnoticed by the user over large distances and the vehicle unlocked or started. In newer systems the passive entry function can be deactivated to prevent such manipulations.
Lock design: Locking mechanism and lock holder Interaction Interaction The locking mechanism . The lock holder is enclosed by the spagnolet when the door is closed. The spagnolet is driven by the lock holder, rotated, and locked in the door opening direction by the spring loaded locking pawl. These indirect systems require only minimal opening forces.
During the closing operation the locking mechanism must be able to compensate door tolerances in relation to the body. The position of the door in the closing direction is determined by the lock holder. This is adjusted once during vehicle assembly in order to set the door alignment and the gap dimensions.
Preliminary detent and Preliminary detent and primary detent primary detent Statutory requirements such as two detent capability, tensile values, and 30 g strength must be satisfied when it comes to locking mechanism design. Two detent capability means that the spagnolet can be held in two positions by the locking pawl the preliminary and the primary detent. In the primary detent the door is in the desired closing position, i.e., flush with the body, and the door seals are fully compressed. The preliminary detent is a position roughly 5 to 7 mm before the primary detent; in this case the door is not fully closed and the door seals are only partly compressed. In this position watertightness is not guaranteed and driving noises can be clearly heard.
The preliminary detent fulfills two main functions: If the lock inadvertently leaves the primary detent position, the door is caught again and does not swing open. If the swing is too small when closing, the door remains at least in the preliminary detent and cannot open again inadvertently. Premium locks with an electric closing aid go a step further: They move the door with the aid of an additional motor automatically from the preliminary to the primary detent, slamming the door shut is no longer necessary.
Opening chain Opening chain To open the door, the locking of the spagnolet by the locking pawl must be removed. The system here is strained by the pressure of the compressed door seals. The locking pawl is connected with the door handles via a lever chain of connecting elements such as rods or Bowden cables. This is also known as the opening chain, which transfers the handle travel up to the locking pawl. The action of swinging out the locking pawl disengages the tension generated by the seal pressure, the door is released, and the typical opening sound can be heard. Aside from the pull and flipper type variants, the outer handle can also feature pushbuttons or proximity type sensors. This provides solutions in the lock in which a motor lifts out the locking pawl and thereby opens the lock. This is already standard in rear locks.
locking mechanism with lock holder 1 B pillar, 2 Locking pawl , 4 Front passenger door, 5 Spagnolet, 6 Lock housing.
Outer locking Outer locking Most of today's vehicles have a central locking system, which is activated from the outside via the remote key. If the vehicle is without electric power and hence the central locking system is no longer working, a mechanical lock barrel usually mounted on the driver's door in the outer handle enables the vehicle to be manually locked and unlocked. This is also the case for vehicles with mechanical locks, i.e., without central locking. Vehicles with the passive entry function as a rule incorporate another pushbutton or a sensor surface in the outer handle which must be actuated to lock the vehicle.
Inner locking  Inner locking  The inner locking, the "knob" in the inside door panel, has already been dropped by some manufacturers. It is replaced in part by an LED in the driver's door in combination with an electric pushbutton in the dashboard or the door and an emergency locking facility on the lock. This emergency locking facility enables the vehicle to be locked even when it is without electric power and protected against theft if the battery is flat. The locking action is then performed by means of a lever on the front of the door; this must be opened for operation purposes. Sensor surfaces on the inside of the door or gesture control to activate the central locking from the inside are also conceivable future developments.
tral locking system. In this case all four doors and the rear lock are electrically locked simultaneously. The locking function can be manually canceled by pulling the inside door handle once or twice. The electric central locking is activated via the radio remote control and a passenger compartment button, for example in the dashboard. Child lock function Child lock function The child lock function for the rear doors is a special feature. This function merely disengages the inner handle, preventing rear occupants from being able to open the rear doors from the inside. Depending on the lock used, the door can however be unlocked from the inside, enabling persons outside the locked vehicle to gain entry. The child lock can be activated manually or by a motor in the lock. This is done manually by means of a lever which can be accessed only when the door is open.
1 Outer door handle, 2 Lock barrel, 3 Central locking motor, 4 Bowden cable for outer handle, 5 Lock holder in the B pillar , 6 Spagnolet, 7 Locking pawl.
Lock layout The primary concern when it comes to the layout and design of the lock as a safety component is functional robustness. This is followed by criteria such as haptics and acoustics. This involves a pleasant operating feel and a closing and actuator noise that is to impart a high quality look and feel. Depending on the functional equipment, a side door lock can consist of 30 to 100 individual parts which interact with each other. The tensile values or tensile strength of a locking system describe the forces that the locking system must withstand without disengaging. Resilient elements e.g., elastomer buffers are required in the lock to prevent door movement and associated noises during vehicle operation. This ensures good closability on the part of the door and the best possible immobilization. The buffers serve to reduce the energy of the swing motion when the door is closed. During vehicle operation relative movements between the door and the body and consequently also between the lock holder and the lock occur. These can cause noises such as cracking or creaking on account of stick slip effects particularly in the event of contamination by dust. Material pairings, contact geometries, the rigidity of the lock, and protection against dust accumulation are of crucial importance to the design of the lock.
inner opening chain of a side door lock 1 Motor for central locking, 2 Locking lever, 3 Release lever, 4 Coupling spring  , 5 Locking pawl, 6 Outer control lever.
Manufacture: A lock is made up of stampings, injection molded plastic parts, cold upsetting parts, springs, sensors, and DC motors. They are manufactured using a variety of production techniques such as riveting, screwing, gluing, and laser welding.
Functional robustness Functional robustness is verified as standard by means of test catalogs harmonized with the vehicle manufacturer. These are based on the requirements set out in Table 1 and are conducted on test equipment in laboratories. The vehicle manufacturer often conducts its own tests in vehicles as well.
Validation Real tests cannot take into account all the influencing factors that occur during series production over a number of years and millions of products. These include for example geometric tolerances of individual parts or deviations from material characteristic values. This can only be delivered by simulation calculations since many factors can be taken into account here with justifiable expenditure.
force from 45.8 N to 36.6 N with the lever ratios and contact points being optimized. The control travel figures of the lock with tolerances are crucial to the functionality of the locking system. Here many individual spatial tolerances interact in the control chain and these are superimposed with the aid of statistical calculations, the socalled Monte Carlo method. The result is control travel figures with the associated tolerances and the probability of their occurrence.
effects such as creaking. Realistic labora : tory tests are carried out to avoid costly, complex vehicles tests with test drives. To obtain meaningful tests in the laboratory, the dust must conform to realistic conditions with regard to composition and particle size. The same applies to the density of the dust and the air flow, which must reproduce the conditions in the door as accurately as possible. A dust accumulation picture as from real test procedures can then be generated in the laboratory with a dust chamber.
Safety functions: Behavior in a crash The locking system must keep the doors securely closed during vehicle operation. In a crash situation high accelerations, forces, and deformations occur. These must not lead to the failure of the locking mechanism/lock holder connection and the unintended opening of the door. After the collision and in a rescue situation, however, the door should be easy to open. To keep the door closed during a crash, in many cases today mass locking mechanisms are installed in the outer door handles. These consist of a weight that is moved during customary accelerations in the crash and then block the outer door handle. This stops the handle from moving outwards and opening the door.
There are additionally tactilely operating systems. In these systems a lever attached to the lock touches the inside of the door outer panel. When this deforms, it blocks the outer control chain, and the door can then permanently not be opened from the outside. This too prevents unintended opening.
Improved systems have speed based crash freewheels in the side door lock. If the outer handle is operated too quickly, the movement comes to nothing and the door remains closed. This also covers crash situations in which acceleration based systems such as mass locking mechanisms do not work. The door can be opened again after the crash.
Theft deterrence The complete locking system must be protected against electrical, electronic or mechanical tampering. Mechanical and electrical connecting elements which are used to open the doors must not be accessible from the outside or may only be accessible with difficulty from the outside. Certain locks use magnetically operating Hall effect sensors. These must be fitted in such a way that magnetic fields from the outside cannot cause unlocking or opening. Many locks have a theft deterrence system also called double lock, dead lock or safe function. Depending on the manufacturer, this system is activated always or for instance by pressing the locking button on the remote control twice. Ordinarily this is not possible when there are persons in the vehicle. The theft deterrence system prevents manual unlocking and opening by the inside door handle, for example after the side window has been smashed. This function is electrically activated in the lock by an additional motor. In the event of a power failure, the theft deterrence system can be manually deactivated at least on one door via the lock barrel.
Detection of an opened door The side door lock also takes on the important task of signaling an open or closed door to the vehicle. This is done by microswitches in the lock which detect the position of the spagnolet and whether the locking pawl has locked. These signals are evaluated either in the door ECUs or in the car's central electronics. Alternatively, some manufacturers also provide door contact switches outside the lock, but these are less accurate.
This information is used to indicate an opened door or trunk lid in the instrument cluster. These signals are also used for the alarm system, automatic relocking of the doors after a certain period of time in the event of incorrect unlocking, or switching off the cruise control when the door is opened.
Development history: Historical view The first locks to be used in vehicle doors were based on house locks. These socalled drop latch locks could not compensate any tolerances, were able to absorb forces only in one direction, and had no preliminary detent. All the components were made of steel, the lever apparatus was not encapsulated, and there were no acoustic damping measures.
From around 1945 onwards this design principle was further developed into the socalled pin lock. This could absorb forces in several directions and had preliminary and primary detents. The locking actions was still performed directly by the drop latch. In 1955 the first indirectly locking systems were introduced; above all, these reduced the control forces and at the same time improved tensile strength. The first acoustic damping materials reduced rattling noises. From 1960 the indirectly locking systems continued to make inroads into the market. For the most part the spagnolet was on the outside and the lock holder had a more complex design to ensure immobilization with buffer elements. Exclusively mechanical locks were used until the 1970s.
The first locks which locked and unlocked automatically were introduced in the USA in the 1960s. Electromagnets were used to activate them. Pneumatic or electrical control elements , which were screwed as separate units onto the mechanical basic locks, came later.
The increasing market share of central locking systems led from the mid1980s to the actuator being merged with the basic lock, and the so called system lock was born. Plastic components and sensors were increasingly being used in its design. The indirectly operating locking mechanism with an internal spagnolet became the standard in the ensuing years.
1 Flex pole actuator for central locking, theft deterrence and electric child lock, 2 Motor for central locking, 3 Motor for electric theft deterrence, 4 Motor for electric child lock.
The first lock modules which brought to : gether the outer and inner handles and the lock into a preassembled and pretested unit came onto the market in the mid 1990s. Market trends The mechanical complexity of locking systems increases with rising functionality. This results in increased weight and a variety of versions, both of which should actually be avoided. Possible solutions are reflected in two market trends: Simplifying the lock body by using a flex pole actuator and simplifying the locking system by using an electric lock.
Today, a separate DC motor is used as a rule for each electromechanical function in a lock. This means for a lock with central locking, theft deterrence, and electric child lock the use of three motors. A flex pole actuator is an electromechanical control element which can perform these three tasks. This eliminates the need for the motors together with the gear units and the lock becomes lighter, more compact, and more robust. Figure 9 shows a conventional lock and a flex pole lock in comparison. The interfaces tot he handles and control points remain unchanged.
A further simplification is achieved if the conventional interfaces are also dispensed with, for example in the case of an electric lock. Here the locking pawl is lifted out only by an actuator, manual opening is no longer necessary. Sensors, switches or even smart phones can be used as controls. The lock body is also simplified such that the manual interface is dispensed with. Functions like central locking, theft deterrence, and electric child lock are now only effected by the control software.
Vehicle access by means : of digital key Task and design In addition to the previously described components of a vehicle access system these are extended for a system with a digital key. These additional components in the vehicle and the associated technology in the cloud and on the smartphone will be explained in the following.
A secure and digital vehicle access system extends the described functions of a keyless entry system by enabling drivers to unlock and lock their vehicle with their smartphone, entirely without the ignition key. The benefit of a digital key becomes apparent above all in fleets, which is why existing commercial vehicle fleets, for example consisting of trucks, can also be equipment with the key management system. This increases efficiency and the time available for the dispatchers and also for the drivers.
Technology in the vehicle The hardware of this system . What is new here is primarily the use of UWB technology, a radio based communication technology for short range use, which with its frequency band of 6.0 to 8.5 GHz facilitates a pure location accuracy of up to 20 cm. This also permits the implementation of so called "Passive Entry", i.e., automatic unlocking and locking.
SKT0104 2Y Unlocking zone Vehicle unlocked Communication zone UWB BLE NFC UWB UWB UWB UWB UWB UWB 2 UWB 3 1 4 4 1 1 NFC NFC
reader and can even be used for vehicle access when the smartphone battery is flat.
Technology in cloud and app The digital "Key Sharing Service" is inspired by the Car Connectivity Consortium. The Car Connectivity Consortium  is a cross industry organization that defines globally the technologies for smartphone to vehicle communication.
The CCC is developing the digital key, a new standard which enables electronic devices .
The system architecture  shows the main components which are involved in creating a new "friend key", i.e., the key which is created by the owner of the vehicle and sent to an authorized driver. An owner key or a received friend key, i.e., a key already "shared" by the owner of the vehicle, is stored on the respective smartphone in the secure element. The smartphone uses the key app natively implemented by the smartphone OEM to communicate with the vehicle via NFC, BLE or UWB in order for example to unlock or lock the vehicle.
To make the benefit of the digital key available to fleets as well, the system also contains the option of a front end, with which a dispatcher for example can send keys to their drivers. The dispatcher can determine the period of time for which the digital key is valid and also withdraw keys that have already been issued. The back end manages the data for vehicles, drivers, smartphones, and ECUs in the vehicle. It is the interface to the front end. The back end is where the digital keys are created and distributed to the smartphones of the drivers. The digital keys are created in accordance with the CCC .
Standard connection Protected connection Vehicle Own smartphone Smartphone of a friend OEM server smartphone manufacturer 2 OEM server vehicle manufacturer OEM server smartphone manufacturer 1
________________________________: References References FMVSS 206: U.S. Department of Transportation National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Laboratory Test Procedure for FMVSS No. 206.
 ECE R11: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to door latches and door retention components. Addendum 10: Regulation No. 11 Revision 3.
 Dr. U. Nass: Erfolgsfaktoren global einsetzbarer Seitenturschlosser. ATZ Automobiltechnische Zeitschrift Issue 7 8/2008, Springer Automotive Media.
 Dr. U. Nass, J. Schulz: Conference Transcript VDI Conference Turen und Klappen  7 8 April 2017.
Once the driver has left the vehicle, the : vehicle must be protected against unauthorized use. It must be locked and the windows must be closed. This is expressly determined in the German road traffic regulations in SS14 s. 2 .
According to SS38a of the German road traffic licensing regulations , which is for the most part connected to the ignition lock. When the ignition key is removed a bolt is enabled which then engages in a hole in the steering column when the steering wheel is moved. This renders the vehicle unsteerable. When the ignition key is inserted again the bolt is pulled out when the steering wheel is turned and the steering is enabled again.
This does not prevent the engine from being started by short circuiting the ignition. Protection against this is provided by the electronic vehicle immobilizer.
A car alarm is designed to make stealing a vehicle or breaking into the vehicle difficult by issuing an acoustic and optical alarm.
Electronic vehicle immobilizer The electronic vehicle immobilizer is a theft deterrence device which is designed to prevent the vehicle from moving under its own power if the associated ignition key is not inserted. Without authentication  of the transponder integrated in the ignition key, the immobilizer prevents operation of the vehicle by preventing for example engine starting, gear selection, or release of the steering lock.
Since 1998, in accordance with EU Directive 95/56/EU , all passenger cars sold in EU countries have been required to be fitted with an electronic immobilizer. Similar regulations apply in many other countries. The electronic immobilizer is not to be confused with automotive alarm systems or with remote keyless entry systems for remote control of the door locking system.
SKT0099 1E Engine control unit Transponder Ignition key Ring antenna Communication between transponder and immobilizer ECU Communication between immobilizer and engine ECU  Immobilizer network RFID communikation Secured communication Immobilizer users Ignition lock Transceiver Immobilizer ECU
Transponder: Transponder The transponder is integrated in the ignition key and consists of an antenna, a microprocessor for signal processing and data transfer, a non volatile memory  are typically used in the automotive industry. These do not have their own energy source and their range is limited to a few centimeters .
Transceiver Transceiver The transceiver  is connected to a ring antenna which on account of the short range of the radio signal is located near to or directly on the ignition lock. The transmit/receive unit of the transceiver transmits and receives the radio signals via the antenna and relays them to the immobilizer ECU.
Immobilizer ECU Immobilizer ECU The immobilizer ECU contains a microcontroller for performing the immobilizer function and communicates both with the transceiver and with the engine ECU, and if necessary with further ECUs in the immobilizer network. The immobilizer function can, instead of being integrated in its own immobilizer ECU, also be integrated in another ECU, e.g., in the instrument cluster, in the on board computer, or in the engine ECU.
Engine ECU Engine ECU The engine ECU receives the signal to enable the immobilizer from the immobilizer ECU via a cryptographically secured connection. Different switch off paths are disabled without an active immobilizer enable signal, meaning that engine starting is not possible. Typical switch off paths are starter, fuel pump, and fuel injection. Immobilizer network Immobilizer network To enhance security the ECUs of further vehicle components are incorporated into the immobilizer network, e.g., the automatic transmission or the steering.
Users of the immobilizer network must satisfy heightened security requirements, including securing bus communication and measures to increase protection against manipulation .
Functional description Communication between transponder Communication between transponder and immobilizer ECU and immobilizer ECU Communication between immobilizer ECU with transceiver and transponder is effected via a radio link and is activated as soon as the ignition key is in range or when the ignition is turned on. The transceiver generates with its antenna an electromagnetic field, which is received by the transponder antenna. Through inductive coupling the transponder receives it energy, which is stored in a capacitor. Data are transferred as a rule in a half duplex process: Data from the transceiver to the transponder . To return data to the transceiver, the transponder does not generate its own electromagnetic field, but instead modulates the transceiver signal by means of load modulation. The transceiver registers the fluctuations and decodes them as a transponder data signal .
The aim of this communication is to authenticate the transponder in the ignition key. Here the authentication can be unilateral . The prerequisite for this scheme is that the transponder and the immobilizer have a common, secret key K. The immobilizer transmits a challenge to the
transponder, which in turn converts and : returns this by means of a cryptographic ENCRYPT function and the secret key K. Then the immobilizer performs the same calculation and compares the results .
Communication between immobilizer Communication between immobilizer and immobilizer users and immobilizer users The enable signal is transmitted by way of a cryptographically secured communication via the vehicle bus system to the engine ECU and if necessary the other users of the immobilizer network. Once the transponder in the ignition key has been successfully authenticated, the immobilizer is enabled by the immobilizer ECU and normal vehicle operation is possible. The immobilizer is automatically activated again after the ignition key is removed.
Security considerations Both older and current generations of immobilizer systems have been successfully attacked in different ways, thereby showing up their weaknesses. Common weaknesses are incorrect implementations, deviations from standardized, cryptographic algorithms and processes, and the use of key lengths that are too short . One requirement that is imposed on an immobilizer system is that the immobilizer even with great criminal application cannot be surmounted or can only be surmounted with great technical effort and financial expense. Attacks should furthermore not be scalable, i.e., knowledge of a successful attack on an individual vehicle should not be reusable for other vehicles. This is achieved among other things by the use of vehicle individual or component individual cryptographic keys.
Once limitation of the challenge response protocol shown in Figure 2 is that the transponder cannot check the authenticity of the immobilizer. Figure 3 shows an extension of the existing protocol. The immobilizer generates a random number , a checksum for authenticating the challenge. Both the challenge and its MAC are communicated to the transponder. The transponder checks the MAC and can thus ensure that the challenge comes from a known, authenticated immobilizer ECU. Only if the MAC is valid does the transponder proceed with the protocol as described above; otherwise the communication is aborted at this point. This prevents the transponder from reacting to any challenge and sending back the associated response .
Production and infrastructure requirements The use of symmetrical, cryptographic processes imposes heightened requirements on the overall product life cycle of each component relevant to the immobilizer. In production the cryptographic keys must be generated and programmed in a secure environment. Components relevant to the immobilizer are reciprocally paired via their secret key so that when a part is exchanged the associated key must be programmed again and the new components "taught" again.
Further applications are the provision of replacement ignition keys and the disabling of ignition keys after they are stolen. The actions can be authorized by the manufacturer in each case via a central key administration and a secured infrastructure and the secret keys made available.
Alarm system control unit Alarm system control unit Control of the alarm system is assumed by a control unit of the comfort electrical systems in the vehicle. The alarm system is armed or disarmed via the mechanical locks or via the radio remote control. When the command "Arm" is received, monitoring of the alarm detectors is activated. If required, selection buttons can be used to disable individual sensors. This deactivation applies once to the next "Arm" command.
Alongside the sensors, the alarm siren is also armed. Once the siren has assumed the "Armed" status, the control unit starts cyclical communication to monitor the lines. If an alarm is triggered, deactivation of the alarm must lead to immediate termination of the alarm.
The control unit must ensure that the max. permitted number of alarms per alarm detector is not exceeded. Moreover, overlapping alarms must not lead to prolonged alarm output.
1 Alarm system ECU, 2 Hood contact, 3 Door contact, 4 Key with radio remote control,  5 Siren, 6 Turn signal lamps, 7 Battery, 8 Roof module with tilt sensor and interior monitoring. 4 3 1 7 5 SG 6 2 8 2 3 6 6 6
by, for example, a piezo loudspeaker. : Communication with the control unit of the alarm system takes place across a serial single wire bus . On the basis of a command from the control unit, the alarm siren can trigger the alarm or autonomously detect a manipulation. Here the following signals are monitored: cyclical communication, line contact to terminal 30 and terminal 31, voltage gradient of the vehicle battery, and overvoltage e. g. due to external supply. The aim is to recognize manipulations reliably and to prevent false alarms.
Tilt sensor Tilt sensor The task of the tilt sensor is to detect changes in the vehicle position caused by jacking up or towing the vehicle. A very sensitive acceleration sensor is deployed here. Its signal depends on the angle in relation to gravity. In order to monitor both the longitudinal and transverse axes of the vehicle, twin axis micro mechanical sensors are deployed . Particularly important is the reliable prevention of false alarms, as the vehicle rolling, e. g. due to wind, may not lead to an alarm.
Interior monitoring Interior monitoring The reflections of an ultrasound or a microwave field are analyzed. If the modification exceeds a comparative value, the alarm is triggered. Here, too, reliable prevention of false alarms is an important criterion.
 Commission Directive 95/56/EC of 8 November 1995 adapting to technical progress Council Directive 74/61/EEC relating to devices to prevent the unauthorized use of motor vehicles .
 R. Verdult et al.: Gone in 360 seconds: Hijacking with Hitag2. In Security'12 Proceedings of the 21st USENIX conference on Security symposium, 2012.
 S. C. Bono et al.: Security Analysis of a Cryptographically Enabled RFID Device. In Proceedings of the 14th conference on USENIX Security Symposium Volume 14, 2005.
 R. Verdult et al.: Dismantling Mega mos Crypto: Wirelessly Lockpicking a Vehicle Immobilizer. In 22nd USENIX Security Symposium .
 S. Tillich et al.: Security Analysis of an Open Car Immobilizer Protocol Stack. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume 7711, 2012.
tow away protection Position detector Setpoint memory Setpoint/actual value comparison Alarm system control unit Alarm output 1 30 2 longitudinal lateral Position sensor 3 31 31 30 LIN Evaluation unit SKA0030 1E
Function and requirements: The vehicle electrical system of a motor vehicle with drive via an internal combustion engine comprises the alternator as the energy converter, one or more batteries as the energy accumulators, and the electrical equipment as consumers. Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram of a vehicle electrical system. The nominal voltage of the battery is 12 V; this system is called a 12 V vehicle electrical system accordingly.
The energy from the battery is used to start the vehicle engine, hence the designation starter battery. This is performed via the starter in the classic drive systems. During vehicle operation, the ignition and fuel injection system, the control units, the safety and comfort and convenience electronics, the lighting, and other equipment have to be supplied with power. An alternator supplies the required electrical power for these components and also to charge the battery.
Heightened comfort and safety requirements resulted and continue to result in a significant increase in the power demand in the vehicle electrical system. Added to this is the continuing trend towards the electrification of ever more vehicle components . Driver assistance systems and infotainment systems, which are still to be supplied with power even when the engine is stopped, have in the meantime found their way into the subcompact car segment as well.
No load current consumers Different ECUs and consumers require a power supply even when the vehicle is parked. The no load current is composed of the sum total of all these switched on consumers. Most of these consumers switch off shortly after the engine is turned off .
An unexpectedly high no load current can also occur when, for example, shutdown of the ECU interconnection does not work correctly or recurring "Wake Ups" cause an ECU to frequently reactivate the interconnection when the vehicle is parked. The control unit networking must be configured and validated for this.
of the switch on duration License plate lamp, tail lamps Indicator lamps and instruments Heated rear window Fan for interior heating Electrical radiator ventilator  8 W 110 W 30 W 22 W 200 W 120 W 120 W  7 W 90 W 25 W 20 W 60 W 50 W 30 W Windshield wiper Stop lamps Turn signal lamps Fog lamps Rear fog warning lamp 50 W 42 W 42 W 110 W 21 W 10 W 11 W  5 W 20 W  2 W
The alternator is driven via the V belt by the crankshaft and converts mechanical energy into electrical energy. The alternator regulator limits the output power such that the desired voltage set in the regulator is not exceeded . The other consumers are connected to "terminal 15". When the ignition switch is in the "ignition on" position, the battery voltage is applied to this terminal so that now all the consumers are connected to the power supply.
Charge balance The nominal output of alternators in the 12 V vehicle electrical system ranges from approx. 1 kW in subcompact size cars to over 3 kW in the upper class. This is less than the consumers need in total. In other words, the battery must also supply power at times during vehicle operation. An equalized battery charge balance must always be guaranteed through the choice and dimensioning of battery, alternator, starter and the other consumers in the electrical system so that the internal combustion engine can always be started and, when the engine has been switched off, specific electrical consumers can still be operated for an appropriate period of time. The alternator supplies current , the battery is discharged. The vehicle system voltage falls to the voltage level of the battery from which current is drawn. If the equipment current draw Iv is less than the alternator current output IG, a proportion of the current flows to the battery and acts as a battery charging current, IB. The vehicle system voltage increases to the setpoint value specified by the voltage regulator.
The maximum alternator current is very much dependent on the rotational speed and the alternator temperature. When the engine is idling, the alternator can only supply 55 to 65 % of its nominal output. However, immediately after a cold start at low outside temperatures, the alternator is able from medium engine speed to supply the vehicle electrical system with up to 120 % of its nominal output. When the engine is hot, the engine compartment heats up, depending on the outside temperature and engine load, to 60 to 120 degC. High engine compartment temperatures cause high winding resistances, which reduce the maximum alternator output.
Battery installation locations In most cars the battery is located in the engine compartment. However, a large battery takes up a lot of space and sometimes, when the amount of space available in the engine compartment is restricted, may not be able to be installed there. Another argument against installing the battery in the engine compartment is the potentially high ambient temperatures. As an alternative, the battery may be installed in the luggage compartment.
Effect of Effect of installation location on charge installation location on charge voltage voltage The line between a battery installed in the engine compartment and the alternator is shorter than for a battery installed in the luggage compartment. This affects the line resistance and thus directly the voltage drop on the cable. Voltage drops can be minimized by suitable conductor cross sections and good connections with low contact resistance, even after a long service life.
Figure 2a shows the conditions for instal : lation in the engine compartment. A battery installed in the luggage compartment requires a longer supply line with the additional line resistance RL2 . Because of the higher voltage drop, the charge voltage for a battery installed in the luggage compartment is lower. The additional voltage difference caused by RL2 can be balanced by increasing the setpoint alternator voltage value. The power to be provided by the alternator increases as a result.
Effect of installation location on startability Effect of installation location on startability Engine startability is dependent on the voltage applied at the starter. The higher this voltage, the higher the starter speed during the starting sequence. Because of the high starter current, the resistance of the supply line has a crucial effect on this voltage. In the case of the variant with the battery installed in the luggage compartment, the line between the battery and the starter is longer than for the battery installed in the engine compartment; accordingly, the resistance and with it the voltage drop are higher. Better startability is assured when the battery is installed in the engine compartment with short lines to the starter.
Effect of ambient temperature Effect of ambient temperature High temperatures, as can be encountered in the engine compartment, intensify aging effects in the battery , which have a negative impact on battery service life. High temperatures in the battery can be reduced by shielding. The charge acceptance of the batteries is restricted at low battery temperatures, i.e., the battery takes in less charge, which can lead to a low state of charge. Low states of charge in turn facilitate aging effects such as sulfating, which lead to reduced usable capacity and therefore shorter service life.
voltage creates a pulsating direct voltage. Furthermore, the switching of the diodes when the current is commutated from one diode to the next generates high frequency voltage oscillations, which are smoothed to the greatest possible extent by the interference suppression capacitor installed in the alternator.
a) Installation in engine compartment, b) Installation in luggage compartment. G Alternator, B Battery, S Starter, RL Line resistances, RV Equipment resistances, IG Alternator current, IV Equipment current draw, IB Battery charging current.
RV1 Engine compartment Interior Luggage compartment RV2 B RLS RL2 RL3 RL1 IB IV IB IG b RL2 RL3 RL1 a Engine compartment Interior Luggage compartment RV1 RV2 B RLS IV1 IV2 IG G S G S UME0683 1E
the battery side , they are exposed to a greater voltage ripple and greater voltage peaks.
Electrical devices which feature a high power input and relative insensitivity to overvoltage should therefore be connected close to the alternator, whereas voltage sensitive loads with a low power input should be connected close to the battery.
for consumers a) Battery side connection of consumers, b) Alternator side connection of consumers. G Alternator, B Battery, RL Line resistance, RV Consumer resistance.
Interaction of : the components Current output of the alternator Important component parts of the alternator are the stator . The induced voltage is dependent on the rotor speed and the level of the excitation current. The generated alternating voltage is rectified by diodes.
The voltage induced in the alternator is dependent on the alternator speed and thus on the engine speed. Therefore the voltage is low at low speeds. For an engine idling speed of nL, the alternator can only supply some of its rated current if it has a conventional turns ratio . The rated current is achieved at full load at an alternator speed of 6,000 rpm. The mean speed attained during vehicle operation must be sufficiently high in order to achieve the nominal alternator output. Driving cycles involving extensive levels of idling are particularly critical, because the available alternator output is so low that the battery is discharged when the electrical load requirements are high.
If the alternator voltage is higher than the battery voltage, a battery charging current flows into and charges the battery. The voltage is limited by the alternator regulator so as to maintain a system voltage of approx. 14 V.
Power generation by the alternator also affects fuel consumption. The increased consumption for 100 W output is in the order of 0.17 l per 100 km driven and is dependent on the efficiency of both the alternator and the internal combustion engine.
Voltage regulation in the vehicle electrical system Generating the excitation field  Generating the excitation field  when starting when starting A magnetic field is required in the rotor to enable a voltage to be induced in the stator windings of the alternator. Self excitation is not possible at low speeds after starting. In this phase the battery delivers the excitation current . Until this point the consumers are supplied by the battery.
of a load variation the vehicle system volt : age changes, whereupon the alternator regulator adjusts the excitation field by adapting the PWM signal in such a way that the voltage is compensated.
case of a long supply line and high currents on the line between alternator and battery, the voltage difference between the battery and the regulator can be high due to the high voltage drop on the line to the extent that power generation by the alternator is too low and the battery is possibly insufficiently charged. This problem can be remedied by the S terminal, which supplies the regulator with battery voltage via a cable which is separately connected to the battery positive terminal.
The alternator regulator bus connection function effects ramp regulation of the alternator voltage back to the setpoint value during vehicle operation after the connection of a high load and the associated sudden drop in the alternator voltage. This function prevents the alternator from abruptly subjecting the engine to load.
Charge indicator lamp Charge indicator lamp The charge indicator lamp is activated by the alternator regulator. It comes on with "ignition on" and goes out when the alternator is supplying current. The regulator activates the charge indicator lamp as soon as it detects a fault .
Charging the battery Due to the chemical processes that take place in the battery, the ideal battery charge voltage has to be higher at low temperatures and lower at high temperatures. The gassing voltage curve shows the maximum permissible voltage at which the battery does not produce gas significantly. The alternator regulator limits the voltage if the alternator current IG is greater than the sum of the consumer equipment current draw IV and the temperature dependent, maximum permissible battery charging current IB.
Alternator regulators are normally mounted on the alternator. If there are significant deviations between the temperatures of the voltage regulator and the battery electrolyte, it is better to monitor the voltage regulation temperature directly at the battery. This is possible in vehicles with a battery sensor. The temperature value is conveyed by means of a communication interface .
all electrical equipment is connected to the battery. The charging voltage is accordingly less due to the high voltage drop. If all consumers are connected on the alternator side, the voltage drop is lower and the charging voltage is higher. The alternator regulator can take into account the voltage drop by measuring the actual voltage value directly at the battery via the S terminal.
Design of the vehicle electrical system: Dynamic system characteristic curve Dynamic system characteristic curve The dynamic system characteristic curve maps the relationship between battery voltage and battery current during a driving cycle . The envelopes reflect the interrelationships between the battery, alternator, and consumers in conjunction with temperature, engine speed, and speed ratio from engine to alternator. A large area in the envelope means that, with this type of vehicle electrical system, significant voltage fluctuations are occurring in the selected driving cycle and that the battery undergoes more powerful cyclization, i.e., its state of charge experiences powerful temporal changes. The system characteristic curve is specific to every different combination and every set of operating conditions, and is therefore a dynamic curve. Measuring systems can be connected to the battery terminals to plot the dynamic system characteristic curve.
Charge balance calculation Charge balance calculation By means of a computer program, the battery charge level is calculated from the consumer load and the alternator output power at the end of a specified driving cycle. Rush hour driving  is regarded as a normal passenger car driving cycle. The battery must maintain a stable charge balance even under these very unfavorable conditions for the energy balance of the vehicle electrical system. The charge balance calculation is used as the basis for defining the design of the alternator and battery.
Driving profile Driving profile The driving profile as an input variable for the charge balance calculation is represented by the cumulative frequency curve of the engine speed . It describes how often a specific engine speed is reached or exceeded.
In urban driving situations in commuter traffic, a car's engine is running at idle speed for a large part of the time due to the frequency of stops at traffic lights and consequently high traffic density.
curves 1 Characteristic curve with large alternator and small battery, 2 Characteristic curve with small alternator and large battery.
Vehicle electrical system simulation: Vehicle electrical system simulation In contrast with this non analytical approach to charge balance calculations, the situation in relation to the vehicle electrical system energy supply can be calculated at any time during operation using model based simulations. They can also include electrical system management systems and assess their effectiveness. In addition to adjusting current levels in the battery, it is possible to record the vehicle system voltage characteristic curve and the battery cycle at any time during a trip. Calculations performed using vehicle electrical system simulations are always useful when it comes to comparing electrical system topologies and assessing the effectiveness of consumers with a high dynamic response or only brief switch on durations.
1 Lighting system, 2 Starter, 3 ECU for engine management, 4 Starter battery, 5 Further electrical system consumers , 6 General purpose  battery, 7 Alternator, 8 Electrical system  ECU.
Two battery vehicle electrical system In vehicle electrical systems with two batteries starter battery and general purpose battery the "high power for starting" and "general purpose electrical supply" functions are separated by the vehicle electrical system control unit to make it possible to avoid the voltage drop during the starting process, while ensuring reliable cold starts, even when the charge level of the general purpose battery is low.
Starter battery . The capacity is reduced.
General purpose battery General purpose battery This battery only supplies the vehicle electrical system , and the minimum permissible charge level.
Vehicle power supply control unit Vehicle power supply control unit The vehicle power supply control unit in a two battery vehicle electrical system separates the starter battery and the starter from the rest of the vehicle electrical system provided this can be supplied with sufficient power by the general purpose battery. It therefore prevents the voltage drop that occurs during starting, affecting the performance of the vehicle electrical system. When the vehicle is parked, this prevents the starter battery from becoming discharged by electrical equipment that draws current when switched on and by no load current consumers.
The 12 V battery can be charged at higher voltage than the usual alternator voltage in the vehicle. The voltage level is limited by consumers, e.g., the bulbs, whose service life severely deteriorates with the voltage. By separation of the starter battery from the remainder of the vehicle electrical system, there are theoretically no limits for the charge voltage level within the starter battery. It can therefore be raised to the "ideal" value by means of a DC/DC converter . This is dependent on the temperature and on the state of charge. Charging duration is minimized with the increased charge voltage. If there is no charge in the general purpose battery, the vehicle power supply control unit is capable of provisionally connecting both vehicle electrical systems. This means that the vehicle electrical system can be sustained using the fully charged starter battery. In another possible configuration, the vehicle power supply control unit for the starting operation would connect only the start related consumers to whichever battery was fully charged.
The value Qmax is obtained when a fully charged battery is discharged at discharge current I20  corresponding to a twentieth of the nominal capacity in amperes until the cutoff voltage of 10.5 V is reached. The amount of charge which was drawn during this discharge process corresponds to Qmax.
The currently stored amount of charge Qact is obtained from the difference between Qmax and the amount of charge drawn during the discharge of the fully charged battery.
The state of charge of the battery correlates directly with the electrolyte density, where furthermore the steady state voltage of the battery is proportional to the electrolyte density. The voltage value which is obtained when a stable voltage final value is assumed after the battery charging or discharging process is referred to as steady state voltage. This can, owing to the slow diffusion and polarization processes in the battery, take several days, especially after long charging phases. The steady state voltage is measured at the terminals.
Functional and performance capability The capability of the battery to meet a specified functional or performance requirement in its current state e.g., providing the starting power for the internal combustion engine is called the SOF . The SOF is application specific and can therefore not be defined generally. For example, the SOF can be used not only as a measure of startability, but also for evaluating the current performance capability of the battery to supply other electrical heavy current consumers, e.g., electrical power steering.
by calculating the voltage curve under load 1 Predicated battery voltage U, 2 Virtual current profile.
The current performance capability of the : battery is evaluated using the SOF by precalculating the voltage drop at battery load with a predefined current profile. If the precalculated .
Moreover, it is also possible to query the current remaining charge or the discharge duration which states how long the battery can continue to deliver the required performance. An application example of this is how long a vehicle can be parked at a known no load current consumption without losing startability. In this case, the SOF does not provide the voltage drop at high current load, rather the remaining charge reserve or the discharge duration until the startability threshold is no longer reached .
As already mentioned, the SOF is determined on the basis of the current battery state, i.e., it depends on the current state of charge over the service life.
temperature to achieve the desired aim of only factoring the dependence on the state of health into the SOH quantity.
based on the available charge reserve This calculation is used to determine the charge reserve or the time duration after which under no load current the startability threshold will be reached.
1 No load current, 2 Charge reserve, 3 Starting current, 4 Voltage curve under load with  predefined current profile, 5 Startability threshold.
nator regulator regulates the required ex : citation current by means of a pulse duty factor . The pulse duty factor of the PWM signal indicates the alternator capacity utilization, i.e., whether the alternator still has reserves and can supply even more current for additionally connected loads.
The alternator regulator additionally outputs this signal as a DFM signal . The excitation current is also output in amperes. Different ECUs evaluate the DFM signal in order, for example, to switch off the seat heating or the windshield heater when the alternator is subject to high capacity utilization.
Electrical energy management Vehicle operating state Strategy of coordination Energy coordinator Battery management Load management Alternator management Interface to other systems Battery Body computer and consumer Alternator A/C ECU Engine electronics Gateway SME0671 2E
heater, electric climate control in vehicles : with start stop function) require additional electrical power, so much so that it is useful to integrate an electrical energy management system .
Purpose of electrical energy management Electrical energy management controls the energy flows and at the same time safeguards the electrical power supply in order to maintain vehicle startability and to reduce breakdowns caused by flat .
The effects of the measures taken sometimes conflict with one another. For example, switching off comfort and convenience consumers results in loss of comfort and convenience, while disabling the start stop function results in increased fuel consumption. Different vehicle manufacturers prefer different measures, and the possible measures for safeguarding the charge balance are prioritized accordingly. Functions of electrical energy management No load current management No load current management The no load current management implemented in the battery sensor by means of software regularly monitors the battery status and thus startability when the engine is stopped. With the aid of precise battery status recognition it is possible to optimize the availability of consumers by means of no load current management, i.e., the operating time of the comfort and convenience consumers can be maximized. In the event of an imminent loss of startability, electrical energy management can, for example, send a message to the display module in order to notify the user. In addition, when the startability limit is approached, load management will reduce the power consumption right down to shutting down individual consumers in order to maintain startability for as long as possible. Examples of such comfort and convenience consumers are the auxiliary heater, infotainment, navigation system, and radio.
Energy management during vehicle Energy management during vehicle operation operation The function of electrical energy management with the alternator active is, in addition to load management, principally alternator management including a recuperation function and the energy management interface to other systems such as, for example, engine management.
Switching of consumers Switching of consumers Load management coordinates the activation and deactivation of consumers in order to reduce power peaks. Load management is also involved in controlling the high performance heating systems are switched back by preference, because intelligent activation can be used to delay for as long as possible perceptible deviations from the nominal performance.
There are limits to deactivating comfort and convenience functions in that this will only be accepted by the user in rare exceptional circumstances. The vehicle electrical system must therefore be configured in such a way that these situations only occur rarely. Noticeable effects must be indicated to the user in order to explain the performance that is deviating from normal operation.
Increasing the alternator output Increasing the alternator output As an alternative or complement to reducing the electrical power demand, it is possible by increasing the engine speed to increase the electrical power generation by
the alternator . For example, to increase the idle speed, electrical energy management issues a request via the data bus to the engine management. These measures have a direct influence on fuel consumption and noise generation; they must therefore be optimally matched to the individual vehicle. During a the vehicle's kinetic energy is converted at least partially into electrical energy and delivered to the battery for storage. This function requires an alternator that can be controlled via an interface to input the desired alternator voltage and a battery sensor for recognizing the battery status. The function of the battery sensor itself can be partitioned in the engine electronics, a gateway or a body computer. Recuperation Recuperation During overrun fuel cutoff an increased desired voltage is input for the alternator in order to charge the battery intensively. Electrical power is generated at this operating point without fuel consumption. In driving states with poor efficiency in terms of electrical power generation the alternator voltage is decreased and the battery slowly discharged again in order to minimize the fuel demand for electrical power generation.
A fully charged battery cannot absorb charge. For this reason, recuperation is only possible with a partially charged battery . This is a departure from the conventional charging strategy, the objective of which is to achieve as fully charged a battery as possible. A minimum battery status required for startability must not under any circumstances be undershot, i.e., the current battery status must be known to electrical energy management.
The recuperation function results in an increased cyclical variation of the battery, the influence of which on battery aging must be tested on an application specific basis. The use of AGM batteries is therefore recommended.
and electrical energy management EEM Electrical energy management, BSR Battery status recognition, EBS Electronic battery sensor SOC State of charge, SOH State of health, SOF State of function, U Battery voltage, I Battery current, T Battery temperature. EBS BSR EEM coordinator Prediction of drawable residual charge for specifiable load profiles: SOC .
Battery characteristics State of Function Residual charge BSR functions Voltage predictor Capacity reduction U, I, T EEM Battery management U, I, T SOx SME0675 2E
A battery sensor which measures the battery current and voltage directly is used to measure the battery variables. The battery temperature is determined by way of a temperature measurement in the vicinity of the battery, since direct measurement of the battery electrolyte temperature in the vehicle would require an intervention in the battery, which is currently not possible. Example Example An example of a battery status recognition function is determining startability on the basis of the SOF. With the SOF the future behavior of the battery when subjected to starting current is predicted. In other words, battery status recognition determines the battery voltage dip for a given starting current profile . Because the minimum voltage level for a successful start is known, the predicted voltage dip provides a measure of current startability. Depending on the interval between the predicted voltage dip and the startability limit, electrical energy management defines measures for maintaining or improving startability.
Battery sensor Battery sensor The battery measured variables of current, voltage and temperature must be sensed very precisely, dynamically and synchronously. Particularly the measurement of currents in the range of a few mA through to starting currents of more than 1,000 A makes great demands on the sensor system. The electronic battery sensor is mounted directly on and combined with the battery terminal. Because the terminal compartment is standardized in accordance with DIN 50342 2 , application on different batteries is not necessary.
Current is measured using a special manganin shunt. The core of the battery sensor's electrical wiring is an ASIC which contains among others a powerful microprocessor for recording and processing measured values. The battery status recognition algorithms are also processed on this microprocessor. Communication with higher level ECUs is via the LIN bus.
As well as calculating the battery status for electrical energy management, the battery sensor can also be used for other functions. For example, precise sensing of current and voltage can also be used for prompted troubleshooting in production and workshops .
Requirements of truck : electrical systems As in passenger cars, the majority of electrical consumers in trucks and buses are supplied with power via a low voltage electrical system. It takes a much greater amount of power to start the large diesel engines of trucks and in heavyduty vehicles in certain regions, e.g., North America.
a) 24 V electrical system with two series connected 12 V batteries, b) 12 V electrical system with several parallel connected batteries. 1 Batteries, 2 Alternator, 3 Starter, 4 Electrical consumers at terminal 15, 5 Isolating switch , 6 Continuously supplied consumers. SME0714 1E Cab Frame, rear end Drivetrain a 2 1 3 4 4 4 4 6 Trailer, body structures B B B B B B Cab Frame, rear end Drivetrain b 2 1 3 4 4 4 4 6 Trailer, body structures G S G S 5 5
governing the carriage of dangerous goods , tachographs, etc.
The great variety of vehicles gives rise to requirements relating to the scalability and adaptability of the electrical systems to cope with different vehicle equipment, usage profiles, and body structures.
The average power requirement of basic vehicles is typically below that of passenger cars, e.g., for tractor units including semitrailer approx. 500 to 700 W. The reasons for this are the lower number of comfort and convenience consumers and the use of compressed air for many actuators. Body structures can however increase the power requirement.
Installation locations for batteries Installation locations for batteries Typical installation locations for the batteries are at the sides on the frame or inside the frame at the vehicle rear end , which in conventional vehicles necessitates long cable lengths from battery to starter and alternator.
The positive cable is typically fashioned by way of a main power distributor. Conducting elements of the vehicle, e.g., engine block, clutch or transmission housing, and sometimes the vehicle frame, are used for the ground cable. However, particularly instead of the frame being used, sections are also routed via separate ground cables.
Isolating switches can additionally be fitted to isolate parts of the electrical system; these are sometimes required by law .
12 V vehicle electrical systems The design of 12 V electrical systems for trucks is essentially the same as the design of 24 V electrical systems. On lightduty vehicles . On heavyduty vehicles a number of 12 V batteries are connected in parallel. On vehicles for
the North American market it is customary : for example to install up to four batteries behind the engine and transmission under the cab and optionally up to four further batteries at the side on the frame. Figure 1b shows a typical schematic design of 12 V electrical systems for heavy duty trucks.
24 V/12 VDual voltage electrical systems Insular electrical systems for 12 V / 24 V Insular electrical systems for 12 V / 24 V small consumers small consumers Frequently 12 V components for passenger cars are used in European trucks and 24 V components from other regions are used in North American trucks. In such cases insular electrical systems are created via 24 V/12 V or 12 V/24 V DC/DC converters. These insular electrical systems are typically not supported by batteries, i.e., the DC/DC converters must be designed for the peak power requirements and any return of current from components must be backed up by sufficient input capacities.
Subsystems for 12 V supply in the vehiSubsystems for 12 V supply in the vehicle and 24 V supply of body structures cle and 24 V supply of body structures In many cases it is necessary to make available a 24 V power supply for body structure manufacturers in vehicles with 12 V electrical systems. This can be solved by means of a 12 V/24 V DC/DC converter and if necessary an additional 24 V battery. A cheaper solution is to use two series connected 12 V batteries, replace the 12 V alternator with a 24 V variant, and use a battery equalizer. The 12 V electrical system including starter is supplied via the 12 V mid tap while the vehicle body is supplied via the 24 V tap.
the most part much smaller battery with : the same nominal voltage cannot be effected via a consistently conductive chassis in trucks on account of the frame structure with mounted cab. Instead, ground return is effected via a combination of conductive vehicle components such as engine block, clutch or transmission housing, and by a separate ground cable.
Some vehicle manufacturers use the vehicle frame as a ground conductor while other manufacturers lay separate ground cables along the frame. The decision as to the optimal solution depends among other things on the vehicle body and the vehicle manufacture. It is in part technically complex to create a long lasting low resistance connection between painted frame parts. Another benefit of using separate ground cables is the monitoring of mass current via current distribution. The connection of conductive vehicle components and ground cables is established by welded on or pressed in stud bolts to which ground cables are screwed with cable lugs. Ground distribution is effected in a star arrangement and the respective ground subsegments are brought together at ground distributors. Such ground distributors can be for example plates with pressed in stud bolts secure to the engine block or clutch housing.
Connection of body structures  and trailers The power supply to the trailer is provided by the trailer socket, which protected by one or more fuses is connected to one of the vehicle power distributors. The connections for vehicle bodies are likewise tapped at vehicle power distributors.
If only small currents are needed for body structures, these can also be supplied via a power sub distributor or a body structure manufacturer interface ECU.
Body structures are typically connected not by the vehicle manufacturer but after the basic vehicle has been completed by a body structure manufacturer. To ensure the integration of the electrical supply of the body structure in the basic electrical system, it is necessary to take into account typical supply scenarios in the design of the basic electrical system. In addition, the interfaces and specifications to be observed in body structure manufacturer guidelines must be described in detail. Batteries for truck electrical systems Essentially, the 24 V and 12 V batteries in trucks are subject to similar requirements to those imposed on passenger car batteries. Truck specific requirements are derived from the cycle resistance and as a result of the installation location on the minimally damped frame from the vibration resistance. At present only leadacid batteries are used for the 24 V or 12 V electrical system in trucks. Due to the high cost pressure, wet cell batteries are still frequently used as starter batteries in trucks, but newer technologies such as AGM batteries or gel batteries are also used as optional extras. Typical battery capacities for 24 V electrical systems are 100 to 140 Ah for light duty trucks and 140 to 225 Ah for heavy duty trucks.
Energy management for truck electrical systems The energy management of truck electrical systems also essentially corresponds to that of passenger car electrical systems. Because in the case of trucks the focus is firmly on vehicle availability and total costs, the design objective of energy management is the optimum between fuel consumption, battery life, and vehi 
cle availability. Truck specific adaptations : of energy management functions are typically made particularly with regard to load management or the actuation of isolating switches.
The design relevant load cases are especially important in the dimensioning of the electrical system. These load cases differ, depending on the design criterion .
Average electrical system load Summer Winter  39  39 39 Trailer 63  63 63 Heating and air conditioner 40 1036 82 Infrastructure Comfort&convenience and miscellaneous 107 107 107 288 Sum 680 1987 769 288
Electrical system concepts : for highly and fully automated driving functions New power supply requirements The introduction of automated driving functions and driverless commercial vehicles is accompanied by an increase in the requirements imposed on the vehicle electrical system. At present there are still no certification regulations or binding standards; the state of the art continues to develop rapidly. The power supply requirements are not yet fixed.
One source of requirements is SAE J3016 . This defines and classifies automation systems for on road motor vehicles in different levels in which the driver monitors the driving task and must be available as a fallback level. These driving functions support but do not replace the driver. Therefore there are no higher power supply requirements here.
The situation is different for higher automation levels . In the case of these automation levels, after a fault in the vehicle also including faults in the power supply the automated driving function must be maintained in a fallback mode at least for a limited period of time until either the driver takes over the driving task or the vehicle is automatically placed in a safe state. Derived from this is the requirement that a fault in the power supply must not lead to the total failure of the sensors, control and actuators of the automated driving function.
Another source of requirements relating to the vehicle are the ECE regulations for the type approval of motor vehicles. Even if no concrete provisions concerning the power supply of highly and fully automated motor vehicles are defined in the 2020 version, requirements concerning the supply of power brakes can however be carried over to automated driving functions. The background is the intention of ECE R13 that a single fault must not lead to an unbraked vehicle. If the braking system is designed in such a way that the driver cannot achieve a minimum deceleration of the vehicle with their physical strength, ECE R13 calls for separate monitoring devices and energy accumulators to provide the auxiliary energy needed for deceleration .
This requirement can be similarly carried over to the case of automated driving functions: If no driver is available or the driver does not have the task of being available as an immediate fallback level, two separate energy accumulators and two separate monitoring devices should be available in order also to bring a highly or fully automated vehicle safely to a stop after a fault in the power supply.
Voltage and energy requirements Voltage and energy requirements The required amount of energy in the event of a fault strongly depends on which components in the fallback mode must be supplied over which period of time to guarantee the attainment of a safe state. This is dependent in particular on the configuration of the automated driving function and its area of application . Thus the amounts of energy to be reserved are much smaller when the vehicle is to be brought to an immediate stop in the event of a fault than when much longer and more complex driving tasks are to be planned and implemented. Especially with regard to the requirement for a "mission completed" it can be much more advantageous also to provide the energy source by way of two channels.
Power supply for safety relevant : consumers Various safety measures are possible in order to avoid a complete power supply failure and to guarantee a "secure" power supply to achieve a safe state .
Fault avoidance Fault avoidance To avoid failures in the vehicle electrical system, it is necessary to implement for example development processes in accordance with the necessary safety rating  automated driving function.
On the component level this means that for example internal faults such as short circuits must be internally encapsulated before they can significantly influence the voltage in the network. Similarly, energy sources must shut down as soon as they supply under uncontrolled conditions more energy than can be drawn.
The power supply can furthermore be subdivided into subsystems to which functionally redundant components of the automated driving function are distributed. If faults are detected in a subsystem, this can be isolated from other subsystems and thereby prevent fault propagation and safeguard the supply to the remaining components.
In addition, it is important to report detected faults and to react to them through the energy management system or the safety relevant driving function.
Fault detection Fault detection In the case of redundant systems it is important that in particular non operating subsystems be checked before the safety relevant function is activated. It is therefore essential, for example when switching the vehicle on but also on a regular basis during operation, to check the function of the power supply components and thereby discover latent faults. This applies for example to the above mentioned electrical isolating switches, which should isolate spontaneously occurring faults from the rest of the vehicle electrical system. Fault prediction Fault prediction The prediction of faults can furthermore ensure that an automated driving function is terminated before the onset of an imminent failure. Fault prediction is effected for example through a process of comparing the aging behavior of a component with the previous load cycles or evaluating wear indicators. This is particularly relevant to mechanical or chemical components which exhibit pronounced aging and/or wear behavior.
Solutions, alternatives, challenges To fulfill the fault tolerance requirements described above, separate energy accumulators and separate monitoring devices are required to supply safety relevant consumers. Figure 3 shows a basic Topology. As shown here, the power is provided from the power source. This can be performed simply or redundantly. Depending on the drivetrain configuration, the power source can be, as shown in Figure 4, an alternator on the same voltage level as the consumers or a 48 V system or an HV  system comprising electrical machine, traction battery, and DC/DC converter.
couplers in Figure 3. These couplers can : disconnect the subsystems in the event of a power source overvoltage or a short circuit in base load consumers. The safety relevant sensors, actuators and vehicle computers which are required for automated driving or to achieve a safe state can therefore be supplied from energy accumulators B1 and B2.
Couplers too come in different designs, as shown by way of example in Figure 4. These can be designed for example in the form of a DC/DC converter, an electronic semiconductor switch or an electronic power distributor like "Powernet Guardian". It is also possible to implement in the couplers diagnoses to monitor the wiring harness for supplying the safety relevant consumers which monitor for example overrange line and connector resistances. Both lithium ion and lead batteries are conceivable even for the energy accumulators. Double layer capacitors as storage devices on the low voltage side are a possibility only for a few applications with low power requirements on the fallback level.
It is fundamentally important for the power content and the performance of the batteries to be safely and reliably monitored by the electronic battery sensor . Here the voltage limits of the safety relevant consumers are a significant criterion which must not be violated.
driving 1 Power source, 2 Base load, consumer group, 3, 4 Couplers, 5, 6 Group of safety relevant consumers . B1, B2 Energy accumulators.
source and couplers as a variation of the basic topology 1a Alternator, 1b Electrical machine, 1c Traction battery, 1d DC/DC converter, 3a DC/DC converter, 3b Electronic isolating switch, 3c Electronic power distributor.
is in development. These can either be : integrated in the established power distributors today or be part of the couplers or Powernet Guardian.
As mentioned above, there is the need to implement 12/24 V subsystems if complex passenger car components like sensors, vehicle control computers or multimedia devices with 12 V voltage requirement must be integrated in the 24 V electrical system. If these fall into the group of safety relevant consumers, this means that within the safety relevant subsystems a voltage conversion must take place which further increases the complexity compared with passenger cars.
A second difference from a passenger car is that the supply to the truck trailer must also be taken into account. This contains if necessary safety relevant consumer such as the ABS ECU, lighting or environment sensors, which depending on the automated driving function and its fallback level are required to attain a safe state. This also results, depending on the safety concept, in potentially the demand for redundancy of these functions.
This example shows that in the field of the power supply of automated driving trucks there are neither established requirements nor solutions and the state of the art will therefore only become established in the coming years.
________________________________ References References LV124: Electric and Electronic Components in Motor Vehicles Up To 3.5 t General Requirements, Test Conditions and Tests.
 ECE R13: Regulation No. 13 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles of categories M, N and O with regard to braking.
 Fail operational and ISO 26262, 2nd Edition; Carsten Gebauer, Robert Bosch GmbH, 11th international annual CTI Conference ISO 26262, September 2019.
Requirements: The battery is used to start the internal combustion engine hence the designation starter battery and to provide electrical energy for the 12 V vehicle electrical system if the alternator does not provide any energy or enough energy. Because the battery can be charged, it is in the proper sense a rechargeable battery. The battery in the vehicle electrical system The performance requirements for starter batteries in motor vehicles are very high. Diesel engines and large volume gasoline engines have high cold cranking power requirements with high starting currents, particularly at low temperatures.
When the engine is running, the electric components are usually supplied directly from the alternator. When the engine speed is low, on the other hand, it is supplied partially from the battery.
The battery covers the temporary flow current consumption for ventilators, pumps and electronic components immediately after switching off the internal combustion engine, as well as for comfort and convenience consumers operated while the vehicle is parked, such as entertainment and communication electronics and for the auxiliary heater, if present. If a vehicle is parked for days or weeks, a peak coil current of typically 3 to 30 milliamperes must be supplied. The battery must still be able to start the vehicle, even after it has been parked for extended periods. For seasonally operated vehicles the starter battery should be removed and connected to a trickle charger. This prevents the battery from suffering damage that can arise as a result of long inoperative periods in the exhaustively discharged state.
1 Gas outlet opening,  2 Plate strap,  3 Battery terminal,  4 Block cover with labyrinth structure, 5 Carrying handle,  6 Terminal post cover,  7 Bottom rail, 8 Cell partition, 9 Envelope separator, 10 Positive electrode,  with stamped grid and positive active mass, 11 Electrode block , 12 Negative electrode,  with expanded grid and negative active mass.
due to the very high inherent natural ca : pacitance of the double layer capacitor of a few farad, the battery smooths ripples in the automotive electrical system current, which helps minimize EMC problems .
The nominal voltage of the vehicle electrical system is 14 V so that the 12 V battery can be charged with the alternator. With regard to the nominal voltage of the battery the vehicle electrical system is called the 12 V vehicle electrical system. In commercial vehicles two structurally identical 12 V batteries are connected in series so that a higher starting power can be achieved for the starter with a 24 V vehicle electrical system. To avoid a nonuniform discharge of a battery, no additional 12 V consumers should be connected to a battery. This would lead to this battery "starving" because in the case of charging at constant voltage by the alternator the battery with the higher state of charge determines the charging current.
The battery in innovative vehicle electrical systems Operating strategies of new vehicles use the battery in an increasingly active manner for reducing fuel consumption and emissions .
A start/stop system is used to switch off the engine if the vehicle is not moving . The starter battery then covers the vehicle's entire power consumption of approximately 25 to 70 A. The engine is restarted automatically when the driver wants to pull away.
Depending on the operating conditions, using the battery's storage capacity in this way significantly reduces fuel consumption. The increased charging capacity represents an additional load on the battery, which is accommodated by special designs such as AGM and EFB .
Numerous vehicles are also equipped with two batteries, for example, to guarantee startability even at a high standby current consumption or to prevent inconveniences . Hybrid and electric vehicles also have a low voltage vehicle electrical system of 14 V, on which the majority of the electric components work. This is supported by a 12 V battery, in many cases a high performance starter battery. In some hybrid vehicles, cold cranking is carried out by a starter motor supplied from this battery.
The battery as component: The requirements mentioned define the electrical properties of the energy accumulator such as starting power, capacities and charge current absorption. Furthermore, depending on operating conditions, thermal requirements must be observed. The battery should also be maintenance free, safe in use and environmentally friendly in production. The lead battery exhibits very good recyclability and achieves the highest recycling rates of all consumer durables at well over 95 %, where lead and plastic from old batteries are re used for battery manufacturing.
The battery in operation The design of the vehicle's components and the electrical operating concept, as well as the usage profile and driver affect the proper function of the battery and, therefore, the vehicle electrical system. Despite the excellent charge acceptance properties of modern starter batteries, a positive battery charge balance sometimes cannot be achieved during regular, short trips through the city in winter and the state of charge decreases. At low states of charge, not only does the amount of energy still available decrease, but the capability of producing currents sufficient to start the engine decreases as well. Low battery charge levels over longer time periods worsen the cold cranking characteristics and shorten the service life of the battery.
Battery design Components A 12 V starter battery has six electrode blocks which are installed in a polypropylene battery case subdivided by cell partitions .
The electrolyte is in the form of diluted sulfuric acid which fills the pores in the electrodes and separators, and the voids in the cells. The electrodes of one polarity are connected in parallel by plate straps and, using cell connectors, are connected and sealed from openings in the partitions to the neighboring cells or the battery terminals. Battery terminals, cell and plate straps are made of lead alloys.
A lead battery develops, particularly during the charging process, a certain amount of oxygen at the positive electrode and hydrogen at the negative electrode. During this electrolysis process, water is consumed from the electrolytes. The charging gases must be released. The one piece cover welded to the battery case provides the battery's upper seal and contains various ventilation openings depending on design. On conventional batteries, each cell has a plug, which is used for initially filling the battery with electrolyte, maintenance and the release of charging gases. Maintenance free batteries usually no longer have a plug. Degassing occurs via an advanced labyrinth system, which prevents liquid from escaping, even if the battery is tilted. However, the ventilation openings, often arranged on the side of the cover, must not be sealed on both sides. Porous sintered bodies permeable to gas are installed in front of the ventilation opening inside the cover. These sintered
Conductive grid Active masses Active masses Because electrochemical reactions in the battery take place very slowly, the electrodes are designed as grids to increase the size of the reaction surfaces. In the manufacturing process, the active masses are coated .
Alloy materials Alloy materials Alloying elements are added to the lead used for the grid to optimize the production process and increase the mechanical strength and corrosion resistance. The strong oxidizing electrochemical potential exposes the positive grid to a continuous corrosion attack. As a result, the cross sectional area of the webs detaches throughout the duration of use, the electrical resistance is increased and alloying elements are in released the electrolytes. Negative grids, on the other hand, do not have corrosive potential and, therefore, are not affected by corrosion .
Antimony If, for example, antimony assumes the function of the hardener for the positive grid, it is gradually released by corrosion and travels diagonally through the electrolyte and the separator to the negative electrode. It "poisons" the negative active mass, which greatly increases the spontaneous development of hydrogen there. This increases the self discharge of the negative electrodes and water consumption if overcharged. Overall, this causes the capacity to be constantly reduced throughout the duration of use. The battery does not achieve the required state of charge, and the electrolyte has to be checked at frequent intervals. This is why, for grids, lead antimony alloys is accepted. Calcium, tin and silver Today, calcium, tin and silver are usually standard alloying elements for maintenance free batteries, because they do not noticeably affect hydrogen development, even when released due to corrosion. To ensure the required strength, the terminals are made from lead alloys with up to around 10 % antimony by mass.
Lead calcium alloys , these alloys feature very high corrosion resistance, which allow lower grid weights.
sulfuric acid in a typical auto starter battery at 20 degC State of charge Electrolyte density in kg/l Freezing threshold in degC Charged 1.28 68 Semi charged 1.16...1.20 17... 27 Discharged 1.04...1.12 13... 11
Charged cell: Charged cell PbSO4 on the positive electrode is converted into PbO2 and PbSO4 on the negative electrode is converted into Pb . There is no further increase in electrolyte density.
If the charge voltage continues to be applied after the cell has reached a state of full charge, only the electrolytic decomposition of water occurs. This produces oxyhydrogen gas .
Behavior at low temperatures The chemical reactions in a battery always take place more slowly at lower temperatures and when internal resistance is increasing. The voltage at the specified discharge current and, therefore, the starting power of a battery even when fully charged decreases as the temperature drops and the internal resistance increases . The further the discharge progresses, the more the concentration of acid drops, up to the freezing point of the electrolyte. A discharged battery can only supply a low current which is not sufficient to start the vehicle.
Battery characteristics In addition to mechanical parameters, such as physical dimensions, attachment, and terminal design, characteristic electrical ratings are defined in testing standards (e.g., DIN EN 50342, .
For the cross manufacturer marking of starter batteries, a nine digit ETN . However, this representation cannot map expanded differences regarding construction characteristics, design and areas of application, which are described additionally in requirements outside of EN 50342 1. Therefore, starting with the version from 2006, the ETN nomenclature was withdrawn as a standard in coordination with battery manufacturers and users. Since then, the ETN only continues to be used occasionally.
Capacity Capacitance is the charge quantity in ampere hours which can be drawn from the battery under specified conditions. It decreases as discharge current increases and temperature decreases.
and on the battery IE Discharge current, Ri Internal resistance, RV Load resistance, U0 Steady state voltage, UK Terminal voltage, Ui Voltage drop across internal resistance. UME0633 3Y UK Ui U0 Ri Rv IE
Low temperature test current : The low temperature test current ICC indicates the battery's current output capability at low temperatures. According to EN 50342 1, the battery terminal voltage with ICC at 18 degC must be at least 7.5 V up to 10 seconds after discharging has started. Further details relating to the discharge period are specified in EN 50342. The short term response of the battery when discharged at ICC is largely determined by the number, geometric surface area of electrodes, the gap between electrodes, and the separator thickness and material.
The battery internal resistance Ri and other resistances in the starter circuit determine the cranking speed of the engine and also identify the starting response. For a charged battery , where ICC must be applied in amps.
Water consumption Lead batteries lose water from the electrolyte through electrolysis, particularly when charging. EN 50342 1 defines the test conditions for quantification. A limit value of water consumption of 1 g/A h, for example, means that, under test conditions, a battery with a 50 A h nominal capacity may lose up to 50 g of water. By comparison, the electrolyte of this kind of battery in new condition, depending on type, contains approximately 1.8 to 2.7 kg of water.
Cycle stability Lead batteries undergo a certain amount of aging during repeated charging and discharging. Cycle stability means the capacity to be able to carry out a certain number of charging and discharging cycles under test conditions until the criteria at the end of service life are reached. EN 50342 1 defines the test conditions for quantification.
Battery types Low maintenance and maintenance free batteries according to EN Whether batteries require maintenance by refilling with water depends primarily on the grid alloy used. Batteries with lead antimony alloy are very durable in cyclical charging and discharging operations, but require frequent maintenance because of the high degree of water loss and, therefore, are only used in some commercial vehicles.
Longer maintenance intervals result from low maintenance batteries with negative grids made from a lead calcium alloy . Batteries with a water consumption under 4 g/A h in accordance with EN 50342 1 are considered maintenance free in accordance with the EN standard.
Completely maintenance free battery Both grids in completely maintenance free batteries are made from the lead calcium alloy. When the vehicle electrical system is operating normally, this water decomposition is reduced to such an extent that the electrolyte reserves will last for the entire service life of the battery. Therefore, completely maintenance free batteries do not require electrolyte level monitoring and do not usually provide a facility for doing this. They have a safety labyrinth cover that prevents electrolyte from escaping even when the battery is at a strong slope and are tightly sealed with the exception of two ventilation openings. Completely maintenance free batteries are already filled with electrolyte in the manufacturer's plant and can be stored in a fully charged state for up to 18 months after delivery due to the very low self discharge.
AGM battery AGM , reduces the storage capacity, and accelerates the overall aging process of the battery.
In AGM batteries, these effects are reliably prevented. The elastic fleece also slightly pressurizes the electrode pair. This reduces the shedding and separation effect of the active mass considerably. Overall, this enables charging capacities more than three times higher than in comparable starter batteries with free electrolyte by charging and discharging throughout the entire service life. This makes it particularly well suited for vehicles with a start/stop system that require the consumer to be supplied when the engine is stopped and then restarted reliably.
1 One piece cover with valves, central gas outlet openings and terminals, 2 Positive electrode pair, 3 Positive grid, 4 Positive electrode, consisting of grid with pasted positive mass, 5 Glass fiber fleece separator, 6 Negative grid, 7 Negative electrode, consisting of grid with pasted negative mass, 8 Negative electrode pair, 9 Electrode block with plate strap, cell strap and terminal.
In the AGM battery, the oxygen that oc : curs at the positive electrode in an internal circuit is used up again, the amount of hydrogen that is produced there is suppressed and the amount of water loss is therefore minimized further. This circuit is enabled by small gas channels in the separator fleece, through which the oxygen is transported. The individual cells are separated from the environment by valves that open only if the operation causes the internal pressure to exceed a value of approximately 100 to 200 mbar. Under normal operating conditions, the valves are closed, which reduces water consumption even further. Lead batteries with sealed valves, such as the AGM battery, are called VRLA batteries and are completely maintenance free.
The inner resistance is particularly low and high cold start currents are achieved because of the high porosity of the glass fiber fleece. Therefore, AGM batteries are also often used in diesel vehicles. Even if the battery housing is destroyed  does not generally leak. This and the improved gassing characteristics make the AGM battery particularly well suited for installation points in the passenger cell.
Gel battery In an AGM battery the electrolyte is fixed by an absorbent glass mat. Another method for fixing the electrolyte is to add silicic acid to the liquid. The gel battery therefore has in principle the same design as a lead battery with liquid electrolyte, which is immobilized in a gel by the addition of silicic acid. This delivers a leakproof, maintenance free battery which is sealed to the outside by a valve .
The benefit of this method lies in the simple design, which through support of the active masses results in increased cycle stability. The drawback is that ionic migration is hindered by the gel, which results in increased internal resistance. This type is therefore generally not used as a starter battery in passenger car applications; it shows off its strengths when used as a general purpose battery in two battery vehicle electrical systems or in solar or camping applications.
EFB battery The EFB battery is a battery with free electrolyte optimized for use in vehicles with a start/ stop system. Although an acid layer is also formed when cyclic charging batteries without fixed electrolyte, such as the AGM battery. However, the positive plates coated with polyester scrim, which provide additional support of the active mass, and further design features produce a more robust design and a greater deep cycle resistance in comparison with standard batteries.
Commercial vehicle battery Bosch also provides completely maintenance free batteries for commercial vehicles. Specifically in commercial vehicle applications, these batteries offer a substantial cost advantage. These battery types have a special labyrinth cover, which guarantees leakproof performance and features central venting. Porous frits integrated into the outlet opening prevent flames or sparks outside from backfiring into the inside of the battery. There are special design variations for applications with extreme cycle or vibration stress. The housing dimensions of commercial vehicle batteries are described in the standard EN 50342 4.
Deep cycle resistant battery Due to their design . A deep cycle resistant starter battery has separators with glass mats that support relatively thick plates containing positive mass and therefore prevent pre 
Vibration proof battery In a vibration proof battery, the electrode blocks are fixed to the battery case by means of cast resin or plastic to prevent any relative movement between the two components. In accordance with DIN EN 50342 1, this battery type must pass a 20 hour sinusoidal vibration test and be capable of withstanding a maximum acceleration of 6 g. Requirements are therefore about 10 times greater than for standard batteries. Vibration proof batteries are mainly used, for example, in commercial vehicles, construction machines or tractor vehicles. Heavy duty battery A heavy duty battery combines the attributes of the deep cycle resistant and vibration proof types. It is used in commercial vehicles which are subjected to extreme vibrations, and where cyclic discharge patterns are commonplace.
Battery for extended current output This battery type shares the basic design of a deep cycle resistant unit, but has thicker and fewer electrodes. Although no low temperature test current is specified, the starting power lies well below starter batteries of the same size. This battery type is used during extreme cyclic charges, sometimes for driving purposes as well.
Motorcycle battery Batteries for use in two wheelers are used in the same way as in passenger cars. A battery with a much lower capacity than its passenger car counterpart is sufficient for motorcycle use. These batteries accordingly have smaller dimensions.
These battery types are often delivered "dry and precharged". Prior to use, these batteries must be filled with the acid provided. The manufacturer's instructions and precautionary measures for handling sulfuric acid must be observed! Because motorcycles are often only operated in the summer months, it is recommended to connect the batteries to a trickle charger while they are out of service in order to avoid exhaustive discharge caused by standby current consumers, which will shorten the battery service life. There are in the meantime also motorcycle applications that use a lithium ion battery.
Lithium ion starter battery It stands to reason to make use of the features of lithium ion technology such as energy and power density, service life and cycle stability for starter batteries as well. Such batteries already appear occasionally on the market. Above all the LiFePO4 system is used for safety reasons.
The battery system must contain the necessary control and monitoring electronics so that in can be used as a spare battery for conventional vehicle electrical systems. Details about the features and function of the electrochemical system are provided elsewhere .
Using the battery: Charging In vehicle electric systems, the alternator regulator specifies the voltage. In terms of the battery, this corresponds to the IU charging method, where the battery charge current I is initially limited by the output of the alternator and then reduces automatically if the battery voltage reached the control value . At battery temperatures well under 0 degC, current is consumed only very slowly.
The IU charging method prevents damage due to overcharging, and makes sure that the battery has a long service life. Modern battery chargers operate according to similarly defined characteristic curves. Older devices, on the other hand, still operate using constant current or a W characteristic curve. In both cases, once the full state of charge has been reached, charging continues with only a slightly reduced current, or possibly a constant current. This leads to high water consumption and to subsequent corrosion of the positive grid. In particular, maintenance free batteries can be damaged by this in the long term.
Discharging Shortly after discharging at a continuous current begins, the voltage in the battery drops to a value which only changes relatively slowly if discharging continues. Only shortly before the end of the discharging process will the voltage collapse sharply due to exhaustion .
Self discharge Batteries discharge over a period of time if no electrical equipment is connected. Causes include the spontaneous development of oxygen at the positive electrode and hydrogen at the negative one, as well as the continuous slow corrosion of the positive grid. Batteries should therefore always be stored in well ventilated rooms and sparking and naked flames must be avoided in the proximity of batteries. Completely maintenance free batteries with lead calcium grids have a self discharge of approximately 3 % per month at 25 degC, which remains roughly constant over the entire service life and nearly doubles for each temperature increase of 10 degrees.
more each day due to the migration of : antimony to the negative electrode until a point is reached when the battery finally stops functioning.
Battery maintenance On low maintenance batteries, the electrolyte level should be inspected in accordance with the manufacturer's operating instructions; when required, it should be replenished to the MAX mark with distilled or demineralized water. This is generally not required for maintenance free batteries in accordance with EN standard. This step is omitted entirely for completely maintenance free batteries.
All batteries should be kept clean and dry to minimize self discharge. Terminal posts, terminal clamps for connection with the vehicle electrical system, and fixing parts should be coated with acid protection grease.
Before the onset of winter, it is recommend to check the battery status with a modern battery tester. If this tester recommends recharging, the battery should be recharged at a maximum voltage of approximately 14.4 to 14.8 V with a suitable charger with a regulated charging characteristic curve . The electrolyte is corrosive. Therefore, gloves and protective eyewear must be worn when handling.
If no battery tester is available, a measurement of the electrolyte density or if not possible the steady state voltage as a replacement. The battery should be recharged as described above if the electrolyte density is under approximately 1.24 g/ml or the steady state voltage is under approximately 12.5 V.
Batteries temporarily removed from service should be stored in a cool, dry place. If the above mentioned criteria exist, recharging is also required. Long inoperative periods at a low state of charge increase grid corrosion and reinforce sulfating. During this, the finely crystalline lead sulphate transforms into roughly crystalline, which makes the battery more difficult to recharge. These effects gradually damage the battery and can lead to their failure in the long term.
A battery failure usually does not happen abruptly; instead, steadily decreasing starting power can provide an indication of the problem. Causes usually include a combination of consumed or sulfated active masses, grid corrosion and short circuits due to separator wear. Modern battery testers can be used to evaluate whether a weak battery needs to be replaced or can simply be recharged.
If no battery defects are determined and the battery's charge is still always low, there may be a fault in the vehicle electrical system . The battery can also be insufficiently charged as a result of using the vehicle primarily for short distance driving. This can be balanced by occasionally driving longer distances or, alternatively, by occasionally recharging with an external charging device.
Battery testers The starter battery is a wearing part. The service life is heavily dependent on the type and use of the vehicle and the climatic conditions. Aging becomes noticeable due to an increase in the internal resistance Ri and a reduction of the storage capacity by loosening of the active masses or sulfating. A low state of charge, on the other hand, is not a characteristic of aging, but a consequence of a usage with insufficient charge balance.
Often, a quick evaluation of the state of an older starter battery is desired, for example, to decide whether recharging is sufficient or a replacement is required. To do so, battery testing devices are available that can be connected to the powered down battery and make a statement after a test duration of generally less than a minute.
Usually, these testing devices imprint a : certain current charge profile onto the battery and deduce the battery state from the voltage response. To do so, they use partially simplified electrochemical impedance spectroscopy approaches . In general, the battery's correlation to the steady state voltage is used to estimate the state of charge. Therefore, the battery must not be charged with other currents during the test.
Either a very rough evaluation is given, depending on the design of the tester. Different manufacturers use a wide variety of methods.
Often, nominal values of the battery  and the battery temperature are also often requested or measured directly to also take into account this important influencing factor.
Battery testers cannot replace a complete test according to the applicable standards , but instead quickly give guideline for additional actions for batteries that have been in use for an extended amount of time. This test is not valid for new or like new batteries because the structure of the active masses is often not yet balanced immediately after manufacturing.
Replacing the battery Specifications in the vehicle's operating instructions must be taken into account when replacing batteries. These operating instructions often describe the specified or permissible sizes and design. The replacement battery should at least provide the specified capacity and cold cranking values to ensure functional and operational reliability. If a special battery design, such as AGM or EFB, is specified, such as in vehicles with a start/stop system, a replacement battery of the same design must be used.
Important: If the voltage in the vehicle electrical system drops to 0 V, consumers like the automotive sound system  may have to be restarted by entering a PIN. To avoid this situation, it is advisable when replacing the battery to connect a backup battery.
Electric power generation: Motor vehicles need an alternator to charge the battery and to supply the electrical equipment such as ignition and fuel injection systems, ECUs, lights, etc. with power. To charge the battery, it is necessary for the alternator to generate more current than is required by the electrical equipment when switched on. The alternator output, the battery capacity and the power demand of the electrical equipment must be matched to each other to ensure that under all operating conditions enough current is supplied to the vehicle electrical system and the battery is always sufficiently charged. This results in a consistent charge balance. Because the battery and many items of electrical equipment have to be supplied with direct current, the alternating current generated by the alternator is rectified. The alternator is equipped with a voltage regulator so that it can supply the battery and the electrical equipment with a constant voltage.
alternator. These alternators are designed for charge voltages of 14 V in many commercial vehicles.
1 Belt pulley with integrated freewheel or shock absorber,  2 A side , 12 Rectifier wiring plate with connections for stator windings and diodes, 13 B side winding overhang of stator, 14 Stator core. 2 3 5 1 4 6 14 13 12 11 7 9 8 10
the conductor loop, the magnetic field in this conductor loop changes, a voltage is induced in it. According to Faraday's law of induction, the induced voltage Uind increases as the speed u of the conductor loop motion vertical to the magnetic field lines increases and as the magnetic flux Ph passing through the conductor cross section increases. The following applies: Uind ~ dPh ___ dt .
If the conductor loop rotates uniformly at the angular velocity o the shape of the induced voltage is sinusoidal. The induced voltage can be tapped at the ends of the conductor loop via collector rings and carbon brushes. An alternating current flows when the circuit is completed.
The magnetic field for generating the induced voltage . The disadvantage of excitation using permanent magnets is that it cannot be regulated.
of the excitation winding drives in the alternator's magnetic circuit similarly to the voltage in an electric circuit a magnetic flux Ph. The flux is directed in the closed magnetic circuit through highly magnetizable iron components and via air gaps as small as possible between the stator and the rotor. By altering the excitation current, it is possible to adjust the magnetic flux and with it the magnitude of the induced voltage. When an external power source supplies the excitation current, this is referred to as external excitation. When the excitation current is tapped directly from the generated alternator current inside the alternator, this is referred to as self excitation.
Alternator design: Claw pole principle The essential components of an alternator are the threeor multi phase armature windings and the excitation system . The rotor's magnetic field is generated as soon as an excitation current passes through this winding. The alternator must feature a high number of pole pairs so that it can generate a high induced voltage already at low speeds. A high number of poles generates a high response per rotation and thus a high induced voltage. This is the prerequisite for a high alternator output.
By applying the claw pole principle, the magnetic field of a single field coil can be split in such a way that the required 12 to 16 poles or 6 to 8 pole pairs are created . The number of poles than can be realized is limited. A low number of poles results in low machine utilization, while a high number of poles greatly increases the magnetic dispersion losses. For automotive alternators there is a good compromise from these two operative connections between 12 and 16 poles, depending on the output of the machines. Small alternators have smaller numbers of poles because the leakage fluxes increase with small pole pitches.
In the alternator, the armature contains three of more identical windings . The winding starts are usually designated u, v, w and the winding ends x, y, z.
In the case of a star connection, the ends of the three winding phases are interconnected at a single point, the star point. Without a neutral conductor the sum total of the three currents to the star point is zero at every moment.
alternator with collector rings 1 Rotor, 2 Excitation winding , 4 Stator, 5 Collector rings, 6 Brushes, 7 Rectifier diodes.
Rectification of alternating voltage: The alternating voltage generated by the alternator must be rectified, since direct current is required to supply the battery and the electronics in the vehicle electrical system.
rectification a) Three phase alternating voltage, b) Alternator voltage formed by the envelopes of the positive and negative half waves, c) Rectified alternator voltage.
UP Phase voltage, UG Voltage at rectifier  , UG,eff Effective value of direct voltage. U, V, W Strands.
SME0694 1Y c 0 Angle of rotation of rotor 0 Voltage U b a Voltage U 0 0 Voltage U 90 180 270 360 u w v UGUG UG,eff UP SME0693 4E
ciency is thus significantly improved in the : upper speed range. In the lower speed range, the amplitude of the third harmonic is below the vehicle system voltage such that the supplementary diodes cannot deliver any current. Supplementary diodes are rarely used in modern day alternators. Instead of high blocking capability power diodes, modern day motor vehicle alternators use Zener diodes to rectify the alternating voltage. Zener diodes limit voltage peaks that occur and thereby protect the alternator regulator and sensitive electrical system consumers against overvoltages which can be caused for example by the deactivation of consumers that the alternator is not yet excited, without diodes a battery current would flow through the stator winding. The diodes are polarized with regard to the battery voltage in the reverse direction so as to prevent the flow of any significant battery discharge current. Current can therefore only flow from the alternator to the battery.
Generally, alternators are not provided with polarity reversal protection. Reversal of battery polarity can lead to destruction of the alternator diodes and poses a threat to the semiconductor components of other devices.
Pre excitation circuit Pre excitation circuit Before self excitation of the alternator can start, a voltage must be induced in the stator which can drive the excitation current. The rotor does also have a low residual magnetism in the unenergized state, but this is not sufficient for self excited operation. The alternator must therefore be externally excited at the start of operation. This is done via the pre excitation circuit, which is supplied by the battery.
current with the permanently set on/off ratio  so that the alternator starts to supply current to the vehicle electrical system.
rent flows through the rectifier's power plus diodes via the multifunction regulator, the carbon brushes, collector rings, and the rotor winding to ground .
Main circuit Main circuit The alternating voltage induced in the alternator's phases must be rectified by the bridge circuit fitted with power diodes and directed to the battery and the electrical loads/consumers.
The alternator current IG flows from the stator windings via the power diodes to the battery and to the consumers in the vehicle electrical system. The alternator current is divided into the battery charging current and into the consumer current.
A Alternator, B Alternator regulator, C Vehicle electrical system. 1 Stator with armature windings,  2 Rotor with excitation winding , 11 ECU.
voltage constant over the full speed range of the vehicle engine, irrespective of electrical load. To this end, the voltage regulator regulates the extent of the excitation current and consequently the magnitude of the magnetic field in the rotor depending on the voltage generated in the alternator. In this way, the regulator keeps the vehicle system voltage constant and prevents the battery from being overcharged or discharged during vehicle operation .
The regulator characteristic curve .
Principle of voltage regulation If the voltage exceeds the upper setpoint value, the regulator switches off the output stage for activating the rotor winding. Driven by the inductance of the field coil, the excitation current initially flows on via the free wheeling diode connected in parallel to the rotor winding; excitation becomes weaker and as a result the alternator voltage decreases. If now the alternator voltage drops below the lower setpoint value, the regulator switches on the excitation current again. Excitation increases and with it also the alternator voltage. If the voltage exceeds the upper setpoint value again, the regulation cycle begins afresh. Since the regulation cycles are in the range of milliseconds, the mean alternator voltage value is well regulated to the specified characteristic curve .
The ratio of the respective onand off times is decisive for the magnitude of the mean excitation current. Because the performance of the alternator is lesser at low than at high rotational speeds, the excitation current must be adapted with changes in rotational speed. At low rotational speeds the on time of the regulator output stage is relatively long and the off time short. The excitation current is only interrupted by the regulator for a short time and consequently its mean value is high. Conversely, at high rotational speeds the on time is short and the off time long. A low excitation current flows.
over the excitation current at the point when : the regulator output stage is switched off and ensures that the excitation current decays slowly until the regulator output stage is switched on again.
For the "load response function" a distinction is made between LR Driving and LR Start. LR Driving brings about a slow correction of the excitation current after an electrical system load has been cut in so that the engine has sufficient time at idle to compensate the alternator's rising drive torque. LR Start means that the alternator is inactive for a specific period after starting so that the engine can settle to a stable idle. The power loss of the alternator indicator lamp in the instrument panel is frequently too great and disruptive. It can be reduced for example by transferring to an LED display. Multifunction regulators permit the activation of both bulbs and LEDs as display elements.
Intelligent alternator regulation Intelligent alternator regulation Voltage regulators with digital interfaces  are used here depending on the vehicle manufacturer. These interfaces are the means used to communicate information which in older regulators was output via individual connector pins.
The control voltage can be adjusted via the regulator interface. If a low control voltage is set, this results in low or no alternator power output because the voltage generated by the alternator is at the battery voltage or lower. The power input and the torque input at the alternator shaft decrease to low levels. On the other hand, the alternator voltage can be stepped up via the interface so that the alternator charges the battery and supplies the electrical equipment in the vehicle electrical system.
Because the alternator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy, the power input at the alternator shaft increases as the electrical power output increases. The internal combustion engine needs more fuel to cover the alternator's power requirement. However, if the alternator voltage is stepped up in overrun phases, the energy tapped by the alternator at the crankshaft does not cost any additional fuel, because overrun fuel cutoff stops the fuel supply. When the driver presses the accelerator pedal, the engine ECU steps down the alternator voltage again with the aid of the communication interface to the regulator in order to relieve the strain on the engine by the alternator torque. This process is also known as intelligent alternator regulation and recuperation.
Interface regulators allow a fine tuning of load response functions to engine operating state, optimization of torque patterns to reduce fuel consumption, and adjustment of charging voltage to improve the battery charge state.
Characteristic alternator : values Alternator performance Automotive alternators function through the constant transmission ratio to the engine in a large rotational speed range . Characteristic curves reflect the characteristic performance of an alternator. The alternator full load characteristic refers here to a constant alternator voltage and to a defined ambient temperature.
approx. 1,000 rpm). The induced voltage increases with the frequency of the change in flux, i.e., with the speed of the rotor: Uind ~ dPh ___ dt .
There is a speed range between zero and the "zero ampere speed", in which the alternator does not output any current because the induced voltage in this range is too low.
The current generated by the alternator at engine idle speed must at least be enough to supply the permanently switched on loads/consumers.
Maximum speed and Maximum speed and maximum current maximum current The alternator current rises sharply under full load conditions as the speed increases. The maximum current Imax is the highest current that can be generated by the alternator.
of an alternator nBL Idle speed range , nmax Maximum speed, n0 Zero ampere speed, nN Rated speed, IL Current at engine idle, Imax Maximum current, IN Rated current.
induced voltage, the current fails to rise : significantly. The magnetizing reactance is obtained from that part of the coil inductance which generates the profitable induced voltage and whose flux takes the envisaged paths in the rotor and the stator. The leakage reactance forms that part of the flux which is not linked to the rotor i.e., leakage fields which short, for example, in the end winding or directly via the groove. The alternator's speed is first and foremost limited by its design .
Characteristic of drive power The characteristic of drive power is used to design the drive belt. The characteristic shows by way of the engine speed range what power is transmitted by the engine to the alternator. It is also possible to determine the alternator's efficiency from its drive power and power output. The characteristic of driver power exhibits a flat shape in the middle speed range and rises sharply at higher speeds.
Operating conditions Rotational speed The utilization of an alternator increases as the speed increases. It is therefore necessary to aim for as high a transmission ratio as possible between the crankshaft and the alternator. The alternator already outputs at least a third of its rated power when the engine is at idle speed. However, it is important to ensure that at maximum engine speed the maximum permissible alternator speed is not exceeded. Widening of the claw poles and the service life of the ball bearings used determine the maximum permissible speed of motor vehicle alternators.
Typical values for the maximum speed are for compact alternators in the range of 18,000 to 22,000 rpm, for compact diode alternators in the range of 15,000 to 18,000 rpm, and for alternators for commercial vehicles between 6,000 and 12,000 rpm. The transmission ratio for passenger cars is between 1:2.2 and 1:3, and for commercial vehicles up to 1:5.
BBattery negative terminal, D Rectifier diodes, I1 Alternator current, R1 Ohmic resistance, Xs Leakage reactance, Xh Magnetizing reactance, Uind Induced voltage,  UGen Alternator voltage.
If the surrounding air is not sufficient to : cool the alternator, fresh air induction from cooler areas or liquid cooling are suitable measures for cooling the components adequately.
Engine vibrations The alternator can, depending on the mounting conditions and the vibration characteristic of the engine, be exposed to vibration accelerations of 500 to 800 m/ s2. The mountings and the components of the alternator are thereby subjected to high forces. Critical natural frequencies in the alternator assembly must therefore be avoided at all costs.
Engine compartment climate The alternator is exposed to splash water, dirt, oil and fuel mist, and where necessary road salt . To protect the alternator against corrosion, it is imperative to observe minimum distances between components with different electric potentials or to insulate the live components.
Acoustic behavior The stringent demands placed on the noise emissions of modern day vehicles and the superior smooth running of modern day internal combustion engines require quiet alternators. As well as chamfers on the claw pole fingers which reduce the hard chopping of the magnetic flux at finger edges, there are other possibilities for reducing the noise magnetically generated by motor vehicle alternators. The following may be used: firstly, five phases in a pentagram connection , and secondly, two three phase systems which electrically offset by 30deg.
Efficiency: The ratio between the power which is supplied to the unit and the actual power output is known as the efficiency. Losses are an unavoidable byproduct of all processes in which mechanical or kinetic energy is converted into electrical energy. The losses in the claw pole alternator are categorized as follows .
Losses in the claw pole alternator Copper losses in the stator and Copper losses in the stator and rotor windings rotor windings The ohmic losses in the stator windings and the rotor winding are called copper losses. They are proportional to the square of the current.
Iron losses in the laminated stator core Iron losses in the laminated stator core Iron losses result from hysteresis and eddy currents produced by alternating magnetic fields in the iron of the stator.
Eddy current losses on the claw pole Eddy current losses on the claw pole surface surface Eddy current losses on the claw pole surface are caused by fluctuations in flux brought about by the stator slotting.
Rectifier losses Rectifier losses Rectifier losses are caused by the voltage drop at the diodes. Standard diodes have a voltage drop of around 1 V. Rectifier losses can be reduced and thus efficiency improved by using semiconductors with a lower voltage drop, such as for example high efficiency diodes with a voltage drop between 550 mV and 700 mV or active rectification diodes , which with the aid of activated MOSFETs exhibit only a few millivolts of voltage drop.
Mechanical losses Mechanical losses Mechanical losses include friction loss in the rolling bearings and at the sliding contacts, air resistance encountered by the rotor and, above all, fan resistance which rises dramatically as speed increases .
Efficiency optimization In regular automotive operation, the alternator operates in the part load range. Efficiency at medium speeds is then 70 to 80 %. The use of a larger  alternator allows it to operate in a more favorable part load efficiency band for the same electrical load. The efficiency gains provided by the larger alternator more than compensate for losses in fuel economy associated with greater weight. However, the higher mass moment of inertia in the belt drive system must be taken into consideration.
1 Alternator power output, 2 Iron losses, 3 Copper losses in the stator, 4 Rectifier losses, 5 Friction losses, 6 Copper losses in the rotor winding.
Alternator versions: Claw pole alternators have completely replaced the direct current generators previously used as standard in motor vehicles. Based on equal outputs for both concepts, a claw pole alternator weighs 50 % less, and is also less expensive to manufacture. Large scale application only became feasible with the availability of compact, powerful, inexpensive, and reliable silicone diodes.
1 Belt pulley, 2 A side , 9 Protective cap, 10 Brush holder, 11 Carbon brush, 12 Collector ring, 13 A side end shield (drive end shield, 14 A side claw pole, 15 B side claw pole, 16 B side ball bearing, 17 Negative heat sink  of rectifier, 18 Positive heat sink  of rectifier.
which the stator is mounted. The rotor shaft is mounted in the two bearing halves. The alternator stator consists of laminations provided with slots which are stacked and welded into a fixed laminated core. The slots contain the coils of the stator windings.
The rotor gives the claw pole alternator its name. It consists of two opposingly polarized pole wheel halves whose claw like pole fingers mesh alternately as south and north poles .
plied with current via the carbon brush/ collector ring system , the brush holder with the carbon brushes is often integrated in the regulator housing. The regulator housing is mounted on the collector ring end shield. Springs press the brushes against the collector rings so that, even under raw ambient conditions, they establish on the engine a secure electrical contact with the collector rings on the rotor shaft.
The magnetic working flux passes through the pole core, the left pole half and its fingers, across the air gap to the fixed laminated stator core with the stator winding, and returns through the right pole wheel half back to the pole core to complete the circuit.
The electronic voltage regulator forms together with the brush holder a single unit if it is intended for mounting directly on the alternator. In some cases the electronic voltage regulator is mounted separately from the alternator in a protected place on the vehicle body or is integrated in a control unit . The external regulator can then be connected via electrical plug in connections to the brush holder.
1 Collector ring end shield,  2 Rectifier heat sink,  3 Power diode,  4 Excitation diode,  5 Drive end shield with mounting flanges,  6 Belt pulley,  7 External fan,  8 Stator,  9 Claw pole rotor, 10 Transistor regulator.
fans produce substantially less aerody : namic noise than the large external fan of a compact diode alternator. They are also suitable for higher rotational speeds . These two properties provide for a higher transmission ratio between the crankshaft and the alternator so that compact alternators can output up to 25 % more power for the same engine speed and size.
The compact alternator is today used across the board in the passenger car and commercial vehicle sectors. The EL Series  Series.
ternator first and foremost in the form of the large fan which is located between the belt pulley and the pot shaped alternator casing. The external fan with a maximum speed of 12,000 to 18,000 rpm draws the cooling air axially through the casing .
Because the rectifier, regulator, and brush/ collector ring system are arranged inside the end shield, the shaft inside the collector rings must be relatively thick to be able to transmit the belt drive forces to the external ball bearing. The collector rings therefore have a large diameter, only permitting a limited brush service life.
Alternators with Alternators with windingless rotors windingless rotors The windingless rotor alternator is a special design variant of the claw pole alternator where only the claw poles rotate, while the rotor winding remains stationary. With this design, the regulator supplies directly to the rotor winding; sliding contacts are not required .
1 Belt pulley,  2 Rectifier  3 Regulator,  4 Drive end shield,  5 Alternator casing,  6 Coolant jacket,  7 Jacket casing for engine mounting,  8 Stationary rotor winding,  9 Stator core, 10 Stator winding, 11 Windingless rotor, 12 Non magnetic intermediate ring, 13 Conductive element.
The rotating parts consists merely of the ro : tor with pole wheel and conductive element. The conductive element consists as a rule of a magnetically highly permeable material . Six pole fingers of the same polarity in each case form a pole finger crown as north and south poles. Only one of the two pole finger crowns is connected directly to the rotor shaft. A non magnetic retaining ring, which is located below the meshing pole fingers, holds the two crowns together as claw pole halves.
The magnetic flux passes from the pole core of the rotating rotor via the fixed internal pole to the conductive element, then across its pole finger to the fixed stator core. The magnetic circuit is completed in the rotor pole core via the opposingly polarized claw half. The magnetic flux must when compared with the collector ring rotor overcome two additional air gaps between the rotating pole wheel and the fixed internal pole.
Thanks to the omission of the wear component collector ring/carbon system, these alternators are particularly suitable for applications which require a long service life combined with heavy alternator load, e.g., for construction machinery or traction generators. The units weigh somewhat more than claw pole alternators with collector rings due to the fact that additional iron and copper is required to conduct the magnetic flux through two additional air gaps.
Liquid cooled alternator Liquid cooled alternator The windingless rotor is also used in liquid cooled alternators, among other applications. In the case of this alternator, engine coolant flows around the complete jacket and rear of the alternator casing. This significantly reduces noise when compared with air cooled alternators in that the alternator is completely encapsulated and no fan produces aerodynamic noise. The electronic components are mounted on the drive end shield.
Current alternator series Efficiency Line Efficiency Line Efficiency Line is pulled into the stator core.
Base Line Base Line Base Line Series alternators were developed for vehicle electrical systems with medium to high power demand. The Power Density Line covers the rated current range of 150 A through 250 A. The stator winding is inserted into a flat iron core. The flat core with winding is bent round and the ends are welded. The flat core delivers a copper space factor of over 60 %, which is crucial to the high power density of PL alternators.
All PL alternators are of five phase design to keep noise emissions and voltage ripple as low as possible. The optimized cooling and high efficiency enable them to be operated at high ambient temperatures.
The starter torque is transmitted via the starter pinion and the engine flywheel ring gear to the engine . The starter pinion engages the ring gear during the starting operation. The ring gear with around 130 teeth is located on the engine flywheel or on the housing of the hydrodynamic torque converter. The starter pinion with around 13 teeth is situated a few millimeters in front of the ring gear in its rest position.
Requirements Because of the high step down ratio between the starter pinion and the ring gear, the starter may be designed for high speeds and low torque. This allows the dimensions and the weight of the starter to be kept small. The transmission ratio is in the range of around 1:10, enabling the speeds required for sustained internal combustion engine operation to be achieved.
Compression and decompression in the cylinders means that the torque required to turn the internal combustion engine over fluctuates considerably, as a result of which the engine speed also fluctuates considerably. Figure 2 shows a typical graph for engine speed and starter motor current on cold start.
1 DC motor, 2 Reduction gear, 3 Engaging system  with solenoid switch, 4 Roller type overrunning clutch  with starter pinion.
Influencing factors The starter must crank the internal combustion engine at a minimum speed , and the ambient temperature. In general, starting torque and starting rotational speed require a gradual increase in starting power as temperatures decline. However, the power supplied by a starter battery falls as temperatures drop because its internal resistance increases. This opposing relationship of electrical load requirements and available power means that the cold start constitutes an unfavorable operating scenario. This must be taken into consideration in the design of the starting system.
Classification Passenger car starting systems are designed for a rated power of up to 3 kW and a rated voltage of 12 V. These can start gasoline engines with up to approximately 7 liters engine displacement and diesel engines with up to approximately 4 liters.
Use of lithium ion batteries The use of lithium ion batteries imposes particular demands on a starter. These batteries are used because they are lower in weight, require less space for installation, and are more suitable for recuperation. Higher voltages and currents are involved compared with lead acid batteries, meaning that the starter is subject to increased electrical and mechanical load. Starter design and operation A starter essentially consists of the electric motor and the engaging system with solenoid switch, engagement lever, overrunning clutch, meshing spring, and starter pinion. The engaging system ensures that the starter pinion meshes with the ring gear. In addition, the starter incorporates a reduction gear, which increases the electric motor torque at the starter pinion.
During the start, the starter pinion engages with the ring gear by means of the solenoid switch with the assistance of the helical spline when the driving switch is operated. The starter pinion drives the internal combustion engine via the ring gear until the engine can run at sustained operation. After a successful start the starter pinion is returned to the rest position by spring force and with the assistance of the helical spring while the internal combustion engine accelerates quickly to high revs.
rpm 0 0 50 100 150 200 250 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 Engine speed n A Starter current I Time t SMS0732 2E
Reduction gear The objective of starter development is to minimize the weight and dimensions of the starter by reducing the volume of the electric motor etc. In order to achieve the same starting power at the same time, a higher armature speed is required to compensate for the existing lower armature torque. In order nevertheless to achieve unchanged starting power, it is necessary for the now smaller armature torque of the electric motor to be compensated by a higher armature speed. The speed is matched to the engine crankshaft speed by increasing the overall step down ratio from starter motor armature to crankshaft with the aid of a reduction gear integrated in the starter. This reduction gear usually takes the form of a planetary gear . It comprises a sun gear mounted on the armature shaft, a planetary gear carrier normally with three planet gears, and a fixed internal ring gear.
The planetary gear transmits the armature torque via the coupled planetary gear carrier to the starter drive shaft and to the starter pinion. The high armature speed here or a simple minirelay which is actuated by the engine ECU.
1 Planetary gear , 2 Sun gear, 3 Internal ring gear.
1 Switch armature, 2 Pull in winding, 3 Hold in winding, 4 Magnetic core, 5 Contact spring, 6 Contacts, 7 Electrical connection, 8 Contact bridge, 9 Armature shaft , 10 Return spring.
armature, that of the hold in winding is : connected directly to the ground potential. When the battery positive terminal is connected to terminal 50 of the solenoid switch . Only once the switch armature is almost completely pulled in is the contact bridge closed and the main starter current switched on. This prevents the starter motor beginning to rotate before the starter pinion has engaged in the ring gear.
As the two winding ends for the pull in winding are now connected to positive, current flows only in the hold in winding. The lower magnetic force of the hold in winding is sufficient to hold the switch armature securely until the driving switch is opened.
The pull in and hold in windings must have the same number of turns. Otherwise the solenoid switch may lock during the deactivation process because the two windings now connected in series are supplied in reverse via terminal 45. The same numbers of turns ensure that the magnetic fields of the coils now passed through in opposite directions compensate each other and the solenoid switch switches off reliably.
1 Battery, 2 Starter motor, 3 Driving switch or switch of a minirelay  for automatic starting system, 4 Solenoid switch, 4a Pull in winding, 4b Hold in winding, 5 Contact bridge.
1 Ignition/starting switch , 6 Engagement lever,  7 Roller type overrunning clutch,  8 Starter pinion, 9 Battery, 10 Armature, 11 Helical spline, 12 Meshing spring, 13 Engine flywheel ring gear.
ing switch is closed terminal 50 of the so : lenoid switch is connected to the battery positive terminal. The solenoid switch armature attracts the engagement lever, which in turn pushes the overrunning clutch with the starter pinion via the helical spline against the internal combustion engine's ring gear .
If a pinion tooth meshes directly with a tooth gap on the ring gear . Starting from a tooth tooth position, the starter motor turns the starter pinion in contact with the ring gear until a pinion tooth finds a tooth gap in the ring gear and the pretensioned meshing spring pushes the starter pinion and overrunning clutch forward.
The sloping teeth provided at the front of the starter pinion permits an earlier start of the axial engagement movement and consequently produces a greater alignment of pinion tooth and ring gear tooth at the moment of the first power transmission. This reduces wear.
clutch via the engagement lever back into the rest position. The overrunning torque caused by the friction of the overrunning clutch generates an axial force in conjunction with the helical spline, which supports the starter pinion's demeshing process.
starter pinion and drive shaft as soon as the internal combustion engine by its own efforts accelerates to higher revs than the starter motor.
The driver is connected via the helical spline to the drive shaft. The cylindrical rollers can move on the roller race and establish the frictional connection between the inner race of the starter pinion and the outer rotating clutch shell of the driver. The springs press the cylindrical rollers into the narrowing part between the driver's roller race and the inner race. When the starter motor starts, the inner race is also move by the frictional forces acting on the cylindrical rollers. The greater the torque, the further the cylindrical rollers are moved into the narrowing part of the roller race, and as a result the transmissible frictional forces increase proportionally to the torque.
When the overrunning operation is initiated, the cylindrical rollers are moved into the widening part of the roller race, whereby with relatively small force they are in contact with the slipping inner race and the roller race. The overrunning torque that develops is dependent on the spring force and relatively small compared with the torques acting in the drive
Usually the overrunning clutch is moved together with the pinion during engagement axially in the direction of the ring gear. However, there are starter versions in which only the pinion is moved and the overrunning clutch is axially fixed .
Demeshing When the driving switch is released, the voltage at the solenoid switch windings returns to zero. The magnetic force abates and the return spring presses the switch armature back, as a result of which initially the primary current contact opens and the starter current is interrupted. The return spring completes the retraction of the starter pinion, disengaging it from the ring gear. The demeshing process is supported by the axial forces acting in the helical spline. The starter freewheels to a standstill and the entire engagement mechanism returns to the rest position.
Switch off function The switch armature is connected to the engagement lever in such a way that there is a certain amount of free travel or "play". If the internal combustion engine fails to achieve sustained operation, the start must be aborted. At this point, the starter pinion and the ring gear are under full load and the starter pinion is fully engaged. When the switch current is switched off, there must be sufficient switch armature free travel to allow it to open the primary current contacts. If this is not the case, the engagement lever holds the switch armature in place. The primary current contact remains closed and it is not be possible to abort the start.
1 Starter pinion, 2 Clutch shell, 3 Driver with roller race, 4 Cylindrical roller, 5 Pinion shaft , 6 Spring.
In view of these boundary conditions, the : starter cannot be considered in isolation. As an integral part of the overall system of internal combustion engine including its ancillaries, the vehicle electrical system with battery and cabling as well as the starter itself, the starter must be matched to the other components.
Triggering the starter Conventional control During conventional starts, the driver connects the battery voltage to the starter solenoid switch. The switch current generates in the solenoid switch the switch force which on the one hand moves the starter pinion towards the ring gear and on the other hand switches on the starter's primary current. The starter is switched off by means of the driving switch, which opens and disconnects the voltage from the solenoid switch.
Automatic starting systems The high demands on vehicles with regard to convenience, safety, quality, and low noise levels have resulted in an increase in the use of automatic starting systems. An automatic starting system differs from a conventional one by virtue of additional components: one or more ballast relays, as well as hardware and software components to control the starting sequence.
 1 Starting signal from driver, 2 Ballast relay, 3 ECU, 4 Park Neutral position or clutch signal, 5 Starter.
When the check has been completed : successfully, the control unit initiates the start. During the start the starting system compares the engine speed with a desired speed for the internal combustion engine. Once the engine reaches the desired speed, the ECU switches the starter off. This achieves the shortest possible starting time, reduces the noise levels, and lessens starter wear.
Start/stop system An automatic starting system can also be used as the basis to implement start/stop operation. Here, the internal combustion engine is switched off when the vehicle is not in motion taking into account defined temperature inputs and the state of charge of the battery, e.g., at traffic lights on red, and restarts automatically when required.
The operation of a start/stop system consisting of start/stop starter motor, ECU with start/stop function, electronic battery sensor, deep cycle resistant battery, pedals with sensors presupposes a higher level activation by means of which the switch off and restart strategy is implemented.
A start/stop system requires an electrical energy management system that incorporates battery charge detection. Measures may also be required to stabilize the vehicle electrical system during the starting phase to avoid unacceptable voltage drops. The control equipment and starting system must therefore be matched. The control units have to fulfill their function at a significantly lowered supply voltage. Demands imposed on start/stop starters Demands imposed on start/stop starters Driven by the efforts of the automotive industry to reduce CO2 emissions, the global market share of vehicles with start/ stop functionality has risen. This is accompanied by demands imposed on starting comfort . To be able to satisfy the demands with regard to service life and more rapid starting to reduce noise generation, the deep cycle resistance of start/stop starters is increased significantly compared with conventional starters. Such starters exhibit features like optimized pinion geometry and pinion resilience, load damping, and long life carbon brush systems. Starters for start/stop operation achieve in conjunction with a high quality ring gear more than 330,000 starting cycles.
If in a start/stop system the engine stop is immediately followed by a start request  additional component load and wear is also accompanied by increased noise emissions.
Knowledge of the rundown behavior of the internal combustion engine and with it the loads to be expected during CoM starts is of vital importance when it comes to designing CoM capable start/stop systems.
Commercially vehicle starters are typically based on four pole electrically excited direct current machines. Starters for large engines are designed as six pole electrically excited machines.
Power requirements Typical commercial vehicles are equipped with diesel or gasoline engines  of approx. 2.3 kW through approx. 10 kW in 12 V and 24 V vehicle electrical systems. Furthermore, even starters with up to 25 kW and 110 V are available for special applications.
Operating principle: Torque is transmitted via roller type overrunning clutches which, depending on the starter size, are moved along with the pinion or are designed to be stationary. To satisfy special requirements, commercial vehicle starters have special features which are described in the following.
Two stage meshing The starter pinion meshes with the ring gear prior to the actual starting operation. The starter torque can be transmitted only when the pinion has become sufficiently aligned with the ring gear.
To guarantee this function with minimal wear even with high starter torque over the entire service life, commercial vehicle starters are equipped from a rated power of approx. 5 kW with a two stage meshing system. Here, after the switching relay has been activated .
vehicles 
contacts is configured in such a way that : the required meshing depth is not only dynamically achieved but also geometrically predefined. These starter types perform in the event of a "corner to corner" connection between pinion and ring gear a "blind connection", in which the second stage is not switched. The starting operation must then be interrupted by the operator and repeated.
1 Magnetic core, 2 Winding, 3 Armature, 4 Switch cap, 5 Contact screw,  6 Return spring, 7 Insulating shim,  8 Contact plate, 9 Seal, 10 Insulating bushing, 11 Housing, 12 Flange plate.
a 50 85 31 50i 30 HW EW M 45 b 50 85 31 50i 30 HW EW M 45 SR 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 10 12 11 5 6 7 8 9
Special requirements for : commercial vehicle starters Ambient conditions The engine compartments of commercial vehicles are subjected to heavy dirt, dust and water bombardment both in agriculturaland construction machinery applications and in on highway applications. To ensure robust operation under these boundary conditions, commercial vehicle starters are increasingly being equipped with a free ejecting meshing drive. The starter is sealed here by a shaft seal between pinion shaft and starter housing against the engine compartment.
Free ejecting commercial vehicle starters can optionally also be completely sealed against water ingress; they are then suitable for use in forded conditions or with a flooded engine compartment. A pressure equalization element is used here to reduce air pressure fluctuations inside the starter caused by ambient and temperature conditions.
In TB/TF Series starters thermostatic switches are optionally available in the carbon brushes and in the relay winding as well to provide further safeguarding in other operating conditions.
Potential free housing In commercial vehicles and also in passenger cars the engine block or the vehicle chassis is usually used as frame potential for the electrical connection between the battery and the starter. However, some special applications , in which all the connections are insulated against the starter housing.
cross section limit is determined by the : line strength. Convention has it that no lines with a cross section of less than 0.5 mm2 are used. With additional measures , even a cross section of 0.35 mm2 may be permissible.
Materials Materials Copper is usually used as the conductive material on account of its high conductivity. Recent trends have involved the increased use of aluminum on account of its weight and cost advantages above all for line cross sections greater than 2.5 mm2. The insulation materials for the lines are defined by the temperature to which they are exposed. It is necessary to use materials that are suitable for the high temperatures of continuous operation. Here, the ambient temperature must be taken into consideration as much as the heating caused by the flow of current. The materials used are thermoplastics .
 Connector for 1 Ignition coil module, 2 Channel deactivation,  3 Fuel injectors, 4 Throttle device, 5 Oil pressure switch,  6 Engine temperature sensor,  7 Intake air temperature sensor, 8 Camshaft sensor, 9 Canister purge valve, 10 Intake manifold pressure sensor, 11 Charge current indicator lamp, 12 l sensor downstream of catalytic converter, 13 Speed sensor, 14 Terminal 50, starter switch, 15 Knock sensor, 16 Engine ECU, 17 Engine ground, 18 Separable connector for engine and  transmission wiring harnesses, 19 l sensor upstream of catalytic converter, 20 Exhaust gas recirculation valve.
tures and thus higher limit temperatures. For highly fluctuating current intensities, it is often useful to measure the contact temperature on an application specific basis.
Line routing and EMC measures Line routing and EMC measures Lines should be routed in such a way as to prevent damage and line breaks. This is achieved by means of fasteners and supports for the wiring harness branches. Vibration loads on contacts and plug in connections are reduced by fastening the wiring harness as close to the plug as possible and at the same level as the vibration where possible. The line routing must be determined in close cooperation with the engine or the vehicle developer. To avoid EMC problems, it is recommended to route sensitive lines and lines with steep current flanks separately, making maximum use of the available space. Shielded lines are not straightforward to produce and are therefore expensive. They also need to be grounded. The twisting in pairs of signal lines is a more cost favorable and effective measure.
Line protection Line protection Lines need to be protected against chafing and against making contact with sharp edges and hot surfaces. Adhesive tapes are used for this purpose. The level of protection is determined by the interval and winding density. Corrugated tubing  with the necessary connecting pieces is often used as line protection. However, tape fixing is still an essential means of preventing movement of individual lines inside the corrugated tube. Optimal protection is offered by cable ducts.
The high integration density of electronics in the motor vehicle places high demands on a car's plug in connections. Not only do they carry high currents , they also carry analog
signal currents with low voltage and cur : rent intensity . Throughout the service life of the vehicle, the plug in connections must ensure the reliable transmission of signals between ECUs and to the sensors and actuators.
The increasing demands of emission control legislation and active vehicle safety are forcing the ever more precise transmission of signals through the contacts of the plug in connections. Many parameters must be taken into account in the conception, design, and testing of a plug in connection .
The most common cause of failure of a plug in connection is wearing of the contact caused by vibrations or temperature change. The wear promotes oxidation.
This results in an increase in ohmic resistance the contact may, for example, be subjected to thermal overload. The contact part may be heated beyond the melting point of the copper alloy. In the case of highly resistant signal contacts, the vehicle controller often detects a plausibility error by comparison with other signals; the controller then enters fault mode. These problem areas in the plug in connection are diagnosed by the on board diagnostics required by emission control legislation. However, it is difficult to diagnose the error in the service workshops because this defect is displayed as being a component failure. It is only possible to diagnose the faulty contact indirectly.
For the assembly of the plug in connection, there are various functional elements on the plug housing intended to ensure that the cables with their crimped contacts can be joined to the plug in connection reliably and defect free. Modern plug in connections have a joining force of less than 100 N so that the assembly operative is able to reliably join the plug to the component or ECU interface. The risk of plug in connections being connected to the interface incorrectly increases with higher connecting forces. The plug would come loose during vehicle operation.
characterized by the number of pins and ambient conditions. There are four different classes of plug in connection: direct engine attachment, attachment close to the engine, transmission attachment, and body attachment. Another difference is the temperature class of the installation location.
typical design of a high pin count plug in connection. An example of the mating component of the plug is pictured in Figure 4. The high pin count male connectors are usually soldered in or stitched in on the ECU board.
The complete plug in connection is sealed against the plug connector of the associated ECU by a circumferential radial seal in the plug housing. This, together with three sealing lips, ensures a reliable seal against the ECU sealing collar.
No. of pins Special features Application Low pincount 1 to 10 No joining force support Sensors and actuators 
purpose. Larger contacts and lines may : also be sealed using a single core seal . When the plug is assembled, the contact with the line attached is inserted through the flat seal that is already in the plug. The contact slides home into its position in the contact carrier. The contact latches on its own by a locking spring that engages in an undercut in the plastic housing of the plug. Once all contacts are in their final position, a slide pin is inserted to provide a second contact safeguard, or secondary lock. This is an additional security measure and increases the retaining force of the contact in the plug in connection. In addition, the sliding movement is a means of checking that the contacts are in the correct position.
the interface. When the lever mounted in the plug housing is repositioned, the slide is pushed via toothing transversely to the plug in direction into the plug housing and uses the links on both sides to draw the plug into the interface by the studs.
The connection between a low pincount plug contact system and the interface is sealed with a radial seal. Inside the plastic housing, however, the lines are sealed with single core seals secured to the contact.
Contact systems Contact systems The electrical contact system inside a plug in connection is formed as a rule by a jack .
There are different type series for the various fields of use for Bosch plug in connections. Depending on the conditions of use, the specially suited contacts are used in these. Figure 6 shows by way of example a two part contact which is used in motor vehicles in components which are subject to particular vibration loads. The inner part the live part is pressed from a high quality copper alloy. It is protected by a steel overspring, which at the same time increases the contact forces of the contact by means of an inwardly acting spring element. A catch arm pressed out from the steel overspring engages the contact in the plastic housing part.
Contacts are coated with tin, silver or gold, depending on requirements. To improve the wear characteristics of the contact point, not only are different contact coatings used but also different structural shapes. Different decoupling mechanisms are integrated into the contact part to decouple cable vibrations from the contact point .
The cables are crimped onto the contact. The crimp geometry on the contact must be adapted to the cable concerned. Pliers or fully automatic, process monitored crimping presses with contact specific tools are available for the crimping process.
Requirements: Electromagnetic compatibility do not have unintended mutual inter ference from electrical, magnetic or electromagnetic effects.
Particularly in vehicle electronics, the importance of electromagnetic compatibility is increasing due to the higher amount of electrical equipment and the use of new technologies, such as electric and hybrid drives with new energy accumulators .
Electronic power train systems installed in the vehicle .
Interference emission : and interference immunity Sources of interference  in the DC vehicle electrical system Ripple in vehicle electrical system Ripple in vehicle electrical system In a conventional vehicle with combustion engine, the alternator supplies the vehicle electrical system with rectified three phase current. Although the current is smoothed by the vehicle battery, a residual ripple remains. In addition, the energy requirements of the electrical and electronic systems influence the DC voltage supply.
The amplitude of the ripple in the vehicle electrical system depends on the load on the vehicle electrical system and the wiring. Its frequency changes according to alternator speed and the consumer behavior. The fundamental oscillation is in the kilohertz range. It can penetrate the vehicle sound systems either directly  or inductive where the ripple is heard as a howl in the loudspeaker system.
Pulses in the vehicle electrical system Pulses in the vehicle electrical system Voltage pulses are generated on the supply lines when electrical equipment is switched on and off. They are routed to adjacent systems directly through the power supply . These unwanted interference pulses can cause anything from malfunction to total destruction of the adjacent systems. The signal shapes and amplitudes acting as disturbance values depend on the configuration of the vehicle electrical system, such as the ground concept, the position of the wiring harnesses and the individual lines in the wiring harness.
and inductive coupling a) Conductive coupling of interference signals, b) Capacitive coupling of interference signals, c) Inductive coupling of interference signals. Z i Internal resistance , RE Input resistance, CE Input capacitance,  C1,2 Capacitance between both conductors, L1, L2 Inductance of the conductors, M Inductive coupling, ZK Coupling impedance.
UAE1205 1Y a b c Za,1 Zk RE L1 L2 CE C1, 2 u2 u1 u1 us,1 Zi,2 Zi,1 M Zi,1 Za,2 Za,1 Za,2 u1 u1 Zi,1 Zi,2
Potentially susceptible devices: Electronic control units and sensors are potentially susceptible devices for interference signals that enter the vehicle electrical system from the outside . These interference signals come from the neighboring systems in the vehicle. Malfunctions occur when the system loses the ability to distinguish between interference signals and useful signals. The possibility of taking effective measures depends on the characteristics of useful and interference signals.
The control unit is unable to distinguish between useful and interference signals if the characteristic of an interference signal is similar to that of a useful signal for instance, when a pulse shaped interference signal is at the same frequency as the signal from a wheel speed sensor. Critical frequencies are those in the range of useful signal frequencies and a low multiple of a signal frequency.
Special feature in vehicle electrical systems with high voltages High voltage and currents in motor vehicles with hybrid and electric drives pose new challenges. In addition to the contact protection required due to the high voltages, EMC is particularly important. In the components of the power electronics and in the electrical machine, large interference signals can arise. Only by using shielding concepts along with suitable filter circuits can these interference signals be reduced enough to allow compliance with the required limit values for mobile communication in the vehicle.
Another special feature is the charging devices with their connections to the public power supply network. This interface, and the resulting requirements with regard to permitted interference emission into the public power grid and the necessary interference protection, must be taken into consideration in the overall design of vehicle electrical systems with high voltages.
High frequency vibrations  and oscillations in the vehicle  electrical system In addition to the low frequency ripple in vehicle electrical systems and the pulses in these systems, high frequency vibrations and oscillations are caused in many electromechanical and electronic components by switching operations. Examples include commutation operations in brush motors or in electronically commutated electric motors, activation of output stages or circuits in digital electronics . These oscillations can spread more or less attenuated into the vehicle electrical system via the connected lines, particularly the power supply lines, and can get into the systems for communications electronics via the power supply lines or the capacitive and inductive coupling in the wiring harness.
Depending on whether the measured spectrum of radio interference voltage has a more or less continuous curve or consists of discrete lines, we refer to it as broad band interference or narrow band interference. Broad band interference is caused, for example, by electric motors in wiper drives, control systems, fans, fuel pumps or alternators, but also by certain electronic components. Narrow band interference is caused, for example, by electronic control units with microprocessors. This allocation depends on the used bandwidth of the radio service under consideration or the bandwidth used during the measurement compared to the characteristics of the interference signal. The various interference signals also have various effects on analog and digital radio systems.
Disturbances can travel through the electric lines in the wiring harness to the supply and signal connections and into the connecting cables of the antennas. They can also be received by the antennas directly and, just like the desired useful signals, they can get into the receiver circuits of the mobile communication devices. These high frequency disturbances can interfere with vehicle communication systems, because they are often found in the frequency and amplitude range of the useful signal. Narrow band interference is
Electrostatic discharge The subject of potential danger to components and electronic circuits from electrostatic discharge produced by electrostatic discharges are reduced to acceptable levels.
Immunity to interference from  electromagnetic fields Sources of interference and potentially Sources of interference and potentially susceptible devices susceptible devices During operation, vehicles and their electronic equipment are exposed to various electromagnetic waves, for example from radio, television and wireless transmitters, which are operated at a fixed location, or even from within the same or a neighboring vehicle. Electronic circuits must not experience interference from the electromagnetic fields of the transmitters and the resulting, unwanted voltages and currents.
T Period duration,  Tr Rise time ,  Ti Pulse duration, A0 Amplitude,  u Pulse amplitude,  f0 Basic frequency of the time signal,  fn 1 Harmonics,  fmin Periodic minimums,  fg Fundamental frequencies, k Pulse duty factor, n Number of the nth harmonic, m Number of lines between minimums, H Envelope, Dec Decade.
UAE1206 1E Tr Ti T Time t Amplitude u/u Amplitude A H fg1 fg2 20 0.9 1.0 0.1 dB Dec dB f0 fmin1 fmin2 40 dB Dec Frequency f a b A0 Tf
rier frequency fS,HF is usually much higher : than the useful signal frequencies fN. LF components of the interference signal are particularly critical if its frequency fS, NF is in the range of the useful signal frequencies fN. Interference signals with frequencies far lower than those of the useful signals can lead to disturbances due to intermodulations.
Electronic components must be designed in such a way that their function is not impaired by the externally generated interference signals in the electronic circuits.
EMC oriented development The importance of EMC oriented development in automotive electronics is increasing at all levels  as well as the configuration of the entire vehicle. Thus EMC oriented design is an integral part of a state of the art development process at all levels. Today, retroactively suppressing interference is usually no longer possible or, at the very least, extremely time consuming and costly.
Vehicle IC modules Requirements of the component manufacturer on the IC manufacturer IC modules Requirements of the vehicle manufacturer on the component manufacturer Component control unit Component control unit Requirements analysis EMC engineering and validation IC
component manufacturer derives its own : requirements for components and specifies requirements for design elements, electronic wiring and semiconductor components. Finally, IC and component manufacturers derive from this the requirements for their own products.
EMC development and verification During the development stages, these  requirements must be defined immediately at all levels in the customer specifications . Similarly, the component manufacturer takes into account the EMC requirements during the IC and filter design stages. During the development process, the effectiveness of individual development steps is verified, in which various prototypes are metrologically assessed or variant studies using numerical simulation methods are implemented.
EMC validation During the closing stages of EMC development, the requirements set out in the functional specifications and resulting customer specifications are validated in order to prove their worth. This validation is typically carried out using standardized test methods in accordance with legal mandates, standards and EMC specifications for component and vehicle manufacturers. The measurements to be carried out, operating statuses used and limit values to be observed are written down in test plans and the results are documented in a qualification report.
EMC measuring techniques EMC measuring techniques are an important tool with regard to EMC compliant development. Through the use of suitable test methods, the effectiveness of design standards like a selection of suitable semiconductor components, circuit design, circuit board layout, design and housing design are drafted and checked. On the other hand, the EMC test methods used in assessing are conducive to complying with EMC and legal requirements with regard to the release of components and vehicles. A wide variety of test methods is used for testing interference immunity and  interference emission. Depending on the methods used to assess interference phenomena, they can be roughly divided into methods operating in the time domain .
EMC test methods: EMC test methods are described in relevant standards and divided into methods for the entire vehicle, for the components and systems and modules.
Component measurement methods In assessing the devices in the laboratory, conducted test methods involving radiation are used. Test objects are always  operated under standardized conditions. The power is supplied via vehicle line impedance stabilization networks , which simulate a uniform wiring harness. The measurement configuration is typically completed on a laboratory table with a ground plane. The test object is connected to measurement peripherals, which simulate its functioning in a realistic manner. In order to ensure isolation from its surroundings, the test setup is run in a shielded room.
coupling of pulsed interference on signal and control lines is reproduced using  capacitive coupling clamps in accordance with ISO 7637 3. As with high frequency  interference emission measurements, the interference emission of pulses is measured in a standardized test setup through the use of relevant switches and oscilloscopes.
High frequency interference  coupling and interference emission Interference immunity test Interference immunity test Coupling of electromagnetic waves for component measurements is achieved through the use of TEM waveguides like the stripline and the TEM cell .
line with the direction of propagation of the electromagnetic wave between a strip conductor and a base plate. When a TEM cell is used on the wiring harness by means of a current clamp.
When the test setup is irradiated, the transmitting antennas are set up at various locations. Through this process, both the coupling of electromagnetic fields in the wiring harness and the coupling in the test object are reproduced.
Test specimen Coupling the RF test signal Signal generator Power amplifier Directional coupler, recording of power Recording of measured values Evaluation of the measurement results and determination of the drive power Setpoint value specification Measurement peripherals Anechoic chamber UAE1209 1E
To decouple from the environment that is, to ensure that only the interference produced by the test specimen is actually measured during interference emission measurements and to minimize the emission of high frequency signals in the environment when interference immunity tests are in progress, the testing for highfrequency disturbance values is carried out in electromagnetically shielded rooms. In order to avoid reflections and room resonance, shielded rooms are lined with high frequency absorbers when radiated signals are used.
Test methods  for electrostatic discharges When assessing the interference immunity of ESD, special high voltage impulse generators are used. In these generators, the ESD impulse is reproduced by charging a smoothing capacitor and a targeted discharge via a discharge resistor. The  capacity of the smoothing capacitor and the discharge resistor determine the  energy output and the pulse shape. With a suitable discharge probe, the ESD pulse is applied to the coupling point, for example a control unit pin, either by a targeted rollover or after contact via a discharge switch in the alternator.
Test specimen Recording of the RF signal Recording of the measurement results Measurement peripherals Test receiver Anechoic chamber UAE1210 1E
.
Selection of EMC tests The EMC tests carried out on an electric or electronic device depend on the component's area of application and its internal design. Simple electromechanical devices, which do not contain electronic components, do not have to be tested for interference immunity to electromagnetic fields. On the other hand, a variety of individual tests must be specified and implemented in EMC test plans for components containing electronic parts.
EMC simulation Nowadays, the application of numerical calculation methods is a method for the EMC development process equivalent to EMC measuring technology. Different  calculation methods are employed depending on the problem at hand. What is critical in each case is accurate modeling of the sources of interference, potentially susceptible devices and the coupling path.
If the conducted coupling is dominant or the design of the electrical circuit are to be examined, various methods are used to calculate electromagnetic fields.
Thus the user has to select the method to be used depending on the problem to be solved. The EMC simulation can be used both when developing and assessing individual components, for designing components and systems, and for examining the entire vehicle, for example, to determine the optimum location for an antenna.
A significant advantage of the EMC simulation is that a wide variety of variants  can be examined and compared without having to build and measure a design model for each one.
Legal requirements and : standards EMC type approval The form of electromagnetic compatibility for motor vehicles is prescribed by law such that, in addition to other requirements also have to be fulfilled for the type approval of vehicles. The currently applicable directive UNECE R10, Revision 5 from 2014 is based on a directive from 1972, which merely contained requirements regarding interference suppression for the vehicle. Since then, this directive has been repeatedly adapted and supplemented to account for technical progress.
The current edition takes into account not only the requirements for conventional motor vehicles, but also requirements for electric and hybrid vehicles with built in charging devices. Since these vehicles come into contact with the public power grid, there must be assurance of appropriate interference immunity to line bound interference from the power grid and a corresponding limit to the interference from the vehicle into the power grid. Two different paths can be taken for the type approval of vehicles. Usually, vehicle manufacturers apply for type approval via type test for the entire vehicle. However, it is also possible to obtain a type approval for electrical and electronic submodules. In this case, in addition to the limit values for interference immunity to electromagnetic fields and the interference radiation, requirements regarding the pulsed interference in the vehicle electrical system also have to be fulfilled.
limit values and precise execution are explicitly specified in the directive. The defined limit values represent minimum requirements. In practice, just barely complying with the limit values specified is frequently insufficient to ensure interference free reception or mobile communication in the vehicle. Depending on their vehicle concepts, therefore, the motor vehicle manufacturers specify in their own customer specifications both a raised requirement for interference immunity and a lower interference emission level for protecting radio reception. For the development of electric and electronic components, therefore, these requirements have to be taken into account from the start by consultation between the vehicle manufacturers and suppliers of vehicle electrical systems.
measuring methods for integrated circuits and semiconductor components. Usually the standards do not specify fixed limit values, but limit value classes. Depending on the individual vehicle concepts, this should enable the users of the standards  to provide optimum technical and economical coordination between the requirements regarding interference immunity and interference emission.
a selection of standardized circuit symbols which are suitable for automotive electrics. But for a few exceptions, they correspond to the standards of the International Electrotechnical Commission .
The European Standard EN 60617 . Requirements Circuit symbols are the smallest elements in a circuit diagram and the simplified graphical representation of an electrical device or a part thereof. The circuit symbols show the operating concept of a device and represent in circuit diagrams the functional correlations of a technical sequence. Circuit symbols do not take into consideration the shape and dimensions of the device and the position of the connections on the device. A detached representation in the schematic diagram is possible by abstraction only.
symbol of an alternator with regulator The circuit symbols contains, in addition  to the symbol for the alternator/generator G, the symbols for the three windings , the star connection, the diodes, and the  regulator.
Circuit symbols consist of circuit symbol : elements and qualifying symbols. The following are examples of qualifying symbols: letters, numbers, symbols, mathematical signs and symbols, unit symbols, and characteristic curves.
If a circuit diagram becomes too elaborate due to the representation of the internal circuitry of a device , a simplified circuit representation is preferred.
Representation The circuit symbols are shown without the effect of a physical quantity, i. e. in a deenergized and mechanically non actuated state. An operating state of a circuit symbol that deviates from this standard representation . Junctions are represented both with and without a dot. Where there are crossings without a dot, there is no electrical connection. Connecting points on devices are for the most part not specifically represented. Connecting point, plug, jack or screwed connections are identified by a circuit symbols only at the points required for installation and removal. Other connecting points are identified as standard by dots.
Table 1: Selection of circuit symbols as per EN 60617: Line; line intersection, without/with a connection Shielded line Mechanical linkage; electrical conductor ; piston actuation Actuation by rotational speed n, pressure p, quantity Q, time t, temp. tdeg n p t t Q Connections Mechanical function Switches UAS1245 1E
Switches: Two way normally open contact with three positions  Heating resistor, glow plug, flame plug, heated window Antenna Fuse Permanent magnets Winding, inductive Various components Actuators with one winding Resistor 0 1 2 UAS1246E
negative Light emitting diode Switch, general, without indicator lamp Switch, general, with indicator lamp tdeg UAS1247E
Pressure switch: Relay, general Solenoid valve, fuel injector, cold start valve Thermo time switch Throttle valve switch Rotary actuator Auxiliary air valve with electrothermal actuator Spark plug Ignition coil Ignition distributor, general Voltage regulator Alternator with regulator  Car radio Intermittent wiper relay Devices in motor vehicle UAS1248E
Loudspeaker: Voltage stabilizer, stabilizer Inductive sensor, controlled with reference mark Turn signal flasher, pulse generator, intermittent relay Lambda oxygen sensor Devices in motor vehicle UAS1249E
Circuit diagrams Circuit diagrams are idealized representations of electrical devices, rendered in the form of symbols. Such diagrams also include illustrations and simplified design drawings as needed. A circuit diagram illustrates the relationship between the various devices and shows how they are connected to each other. A circuit diagram may be supplemented by tables, graphs, or descriptions. The type of circuit diagram actually used is determined by its particular purpose .
Wiring diagrams for the vehicle's electrical system Classification by purpose Wiring diagrams for explaining the function Wiring diagrams for explaining the connection Usually with a diagram of the internal wiring General wiring diagram Circuit diagram Connection diagram Semiconnected Connected Detached Single line or multi line diagram Arrangement of the graphical symbols Positionally accurate diagram Classification by type of representation UAS0968 5E
overview of the task, design, structure and function of an electrical system or a part thereof, and to serve as a guide for more detailed circuit documentation .
The devices are depicted by squares, rectangles and circles with qualifying symbols inside them similar to EN 60617, Part 2. The lines are for the most part drawn as single lines.
Schematic diagram A schematic diagram is the detailed representation of a circuit. By clearly depicting individual current paths, it also indicates how an electrical circuit operates. In a schematic diagram, the clear presentation of the circuit's operation, which makes the diagram easy to read, must not be interfered with by the presentation of the individual circuit components and their spatial relationships. Figure 7 shows the schematic diagram of a starter motor in assembled and detached representations.
A1 ECU,   B1 Sensor for engine speed, B2 Sensor for reference mark,   B3 Sensor for air mass, B4 Sensor for intake air temperature,   B5 Sensor for engine temperature, B6 Throttle valve switch,   D1 Computing unit , D5 Input Output,   D6 Data bus, D7 Microcomputer,   G1 Battery, K1 Pump relay, M1 Electric fuel pump,   N1 to N3 Driver stages, S1 Ignition/starter switch, S2 Map changeover switch,   T1 Ignition coil, U1, U2 Pulse shapers, U3 to U6 Analog digital converters,   Y1 Fuel injector.
G1 S1 B2 B3 B4 B1 30 50 D2 D1 D3 D4 D6 D7 D5 U1 U2 CPU RAM ROM I/O N1 K1 M1 M U3 U4 U5 U6 t m B5 B6 S2 N2 T1 N3 Y1 A1 t t UMK0052 4Y
circuit symbols and destinations, particularly in a detached representation. Representation of the circuit Representation of the circuit Mostly multi line representation is used in the schematic diagram. For the layout of the circuit symbols, there are, in accordance with EN 81346 Part 1, the following methods of representation which can be combined in the same circuit diagram.
K1 Control relay, K2 Engagement relay, holding winding and pull in winding, M1 Starter motor with series and shunt windings. 30, 30f, 31, 50b Terminal designations. 50 K1 K2 M a b M1 31 30 50b 30f 30 30f 50 31 30 M K1 K1 K1 50b 31 M1 M1 K1 K2 M1 K2 K2 UAS0969 1Y
individual devices or their parts is not taken into consideration. The priority is for the layout of the current paths to be as linear, clear and crossing free as possible. The main purpose of this representation is to identify the function of a circuit. The association of the individual parts must be identified using an identification system in accordance with EN 81346, Part 2. The identification associated with a device is located on each individual, separately represented circuit symbol for that device. Devices shown detached must be indicated once complete and assembled at a point in the circuit diagram if this is necessary to understand the circuit.
Topographical representation In this representation, the position of the circuit symbol entirely or partially corresponds to the spatial position within the device or part.
Ground representation For most motor vehicles, the single conductor system, in which ground acts as the return conductor, is preferred for its simplicity. If a perfectly conducting connection of the individual ground parts is not guaranteed or if voltages in excess of 42 V are involved, the return conductor is also laid insulated from ground.
Current paths and lines Current paths and lines The circuits are arranged in such a way as to produce and clear representation. The individual current paths, with the effective direction preferably from left to right or from top to bottom, should generally run parallel to the edge of the circuit diagram as linearly as possible, crossing free and without changes of direction.
When there is a bundling of parallel lines, these are grouped into units of three lines each, and there follows a gap to the next group.
Boundary lines and framings Boundary lines and framings Dot and dash separating or framing lines delimit parts of circuits in order to show the functional or design association of the devices or parts.
The identifier at associated break points matches. Terminal designations in accordance with DIN 72552 , the specification of the operating concept and specifications in the form of alphanumeric characters serve as the identifier.
Labeling Labeling Devices, parts or circuit symbols are identified in circuit diagrams with a letter and a number in accordance with EN 81346, Part 2. This identification is placed on the left or underneath the circuit symbol. The qualifying symbol specified in the standard for the type of devices can be omitted if this does not give rise to ambiguity.
In the case of nested devices, a device is a component part of another, e. g. starter M1 with built in engagement relay K6. The device designation is then: M1 K6. Designation of associated circuit symbols in a detached representation: Each individual, separately represented circuit symbol of a device is given the designation common to the device.
Pin designations must be written outside the circuit symbol, and in the case of framing lines preferably outside the framing.
Where the current paths run horizontally: The specifications assigned to the  individual circuit symbols are written under the relevant circuit symbols. The terminal designation is located directly outside the actual circuit symbols above the connecting line.
Where the current paths run vertically: The specifications assigned to the individual circuit symbols are written on the left next to the relevant circuit symbols. The terminal designation is located directly outside the actual circuit symbol, on the right if the format is horizontal and on the left next to the connecting line if the format is vertical.
Terminal diagram The terminal diagram shows the terminal locations of electrical devices and the connected outer and if necessary  inner conductive connections . Representation Representation The individual devices are represented by squares, rectangles, circles and circuit symbols or even pictorially represented, and can be topographically arranged.
Labeling: Labeling The devices are labeled in accordance with EN 81346, Part 2. Terminals and plug in connections are identified with the terminal designations present on the  device .
In the detached method of representation, the continuous connecting lines between the individual devices are omitted. All outgoing lines from a device are given a destination designation .
.
Bosch makes assembled representation diagrams for further systems in a great number of motor vehicles available in ESI . This provides automotive repair shops with a useful tool for locating faults or wiring retrofit equipment. Figure 15 shows as an example the assembled representation diagram for a door locking system.
on assembled representation diagrams 1 Wire color code,  2 Connector number,  3 Pin number .
Position Designation BLK Black BLU Blue BRN Brown CLR Clear DK BLU Dark blue DK GRN Dark green GRN Green GRY Gray LT BLU Light blue LT GRN Light green NCA Color not known ORG Orange PNK Pink PPL Purple RED Red TAN Tan VIO Violet WHT White YEL Yellow 1 3 2 2 3 1 GRN/BLU GRN / BLU 2 2 GRN/BLK 3 BLU/RED 4 C4 C4 UAS1260Y
Figure 15: Assembled representation diagram of a door locking system : M P F70 F53 A750 A1865 A28 Y361 Y157 Y157 Y365 S1178 Y366 Y157 Y157 Y157 Y364 A28 Y157 Y360 M334 Y367 KL 15/54 BLK/YEL BLK/YEL YEL YEL YEL GRN GRN YEL YEL GRN RED/WHT BRN/BLK UNLOCK LOCK BLU BLU YEL YEL YEL YEL YEL YEL RED/WHT 0202 CONNECTOR BLOCK BRN BRN BRN BRN/BLK BRN BLU BRN 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 2 1 3 3 3 1 RED/WHT RED/WHT RED/WHT RED/WHT RED/WHT KL 20 16A 16A UNLOCK LOCK 2 1 3 UNLOCK LOCK 2 1 3 YEL BRN/BLK RED/WHT UAS1261Y
1 Left front fender,  2 Front end,  3 Engine,  4 Bulkhead,  5 Right front fender,  6 Footwell bulkhead/dashboard,  7 Left front door,  8 Right front door,  9 Left rear door,  10 Right rear door,  11 A pillars,  12 Passenger compartment,  13 Roof,  14 Rear end,  15 C pillars,  16 B pillars.
vide a clear, internationally comprehensible identification of systems, parts, etc. which are represented by circuit symbols in a circuit diagram. They appear next to the circuit symbols and consist of a series of defined qualifying symbols, letters and numbers .
Table 5: Code letters for designating electrical devices fuel injector, electromagnetic clutch, electromagnetic brake, electric air slider, electric fuel pump,  electromagnet, electric starting valve,  transmission control, linear solenoid,  kickdown solenoid valve,  headlight leveling control, level control valve, switching valve, starting valve,  door locking, central locking system,  auxiliary air slider Z Electric filter Screening unit, suppression filter, filter chain, timer
In addition to the terminal designations listed, designations according to DIN VDE standards may also be used on electrical machines. Multiple connectors, for which the number of terminal designations as per DIN 72552 no longer suffice, are numbered by consecutive numbers or letters whose function assignment is not specified by standards.
Alternator negative terminal DF Alternator field winding DF1 Alternator field winding 1 DF2 Alternator field winding 2 U, V, W Three phase terminals Audio systems 75 Radio, cigarette lighter 76 Loudspeaker Switches NC contact/changeover contact 81 Input 81a 1st output, NC side 81b 2nd output, NC side NO contact 82 Input 82a 1st output 82b 2nd output 82z 1st input 82y 2nd input Multi stage switch 83 Input 83a Output, position 1 83b Output, position 2 83L Output, position left 83R Output, position right Terminal Definition Current relay 84 Input, output, relay contact 84a Output, drive 84b Output, relay contact Switching relay 85 Output, drive  L Left side turn signal lamp R Right side turn signal lamp
Vehicle electrical systems for mildand full hybrid vehicles The function of a mildor full hybrid vehicle . Generally, for cost reasons, automakers attempt to make do with standard 12 V components, as these are available cheaply and in large quantities.
for the drive) 1 Electrical machine,  2 PWM inverter,  3 DC link capacitor,  4 Pre charging contactor,  5 Main contactor,  6 Pre charging  resistor,  7 HV battery,  8 12 V consumer,  9 12 V battery, 10 Isolating DC DC converter, 11 Air conditioning compressor, 12 PWM inverter, 13 DC link capacitor.
SEB0004 4E HV vehicle electrical system 10 8 9 12 V electrical system 1 11 12 13 2 3 4 5 5 6 7 DC DC
Operating principle Operating principle The HV vehicle electrical system is supplied with voltage via the contactors integrated in the HV battery. When the vehicle is switched off or if there is an accident, the HV vehicle electrical system is de energized via the contactors, limiting the hazardous high voltage to the battery pack. The PWM inverter generates a threephase alternating current from the high direct voltage with a variable current intensity and frequency for the electrical machine .
Power is supplied to the HV vehicle electrical system in hybrid drives when the electrical machine is in generator mode or from the HV battery.
The isolating DC DC converter transfers electrical energy from the more powerful HV vehicle electrical system to the 12 V vehicle electrical system. Power is thus supplied to this low voltage vehicle electrical system from the HV vehicle electrical system.
An example of an additional component of the HV vehicle electrical system can be an electric air conditioning compressor, which depending on the vehicle requires a maximum electric power of 3 to 6 kW and is activated by a second PWM inverter. HV vehicle electrical system for parallel HV vehicle electrical system for parallel hybrids hybrids The topologies of the vehicle electrical systems for mild and full hybrids with only one electrical machine each are very similar. The vehicle electrical system of a mild hybrid makes do with a lower energy accumulation and lower output capacity, as the vehicle can "crawl" electrically for a very short time at most.
The primary flow of energy of a vehicle with parallel hybrid drive is from the HV battery to the electrical machine and vice versa. There is also a small flow of energy via the DC DC converter to the 12 V vehicle electrical system or to other HV consumers.
HV electrical system for power split or HV electrical system for power split or series hybrid drives series hybrid drives Vehicles with two electrical machines require an enhanced electrical system topology.
In the case of "Dedicated Hybrid Transmissions" , i.e., power split or parallelseries drivetrain topologies, high amounts of energy are transferred by the generator machine that can be coupled to the internal combustion engine to the drive machine. Utilization of the optimal, i.e., low loss, map ranges must be ensured in the operating strategy.
The battery voltage is determined by their design . By managing the DC link voltage just above the maximum value of the rectified induced voltages of the electrical machines it is possible to minimize the switching rate of the inverter switches and with it the electrical inverter losses and additional losses in the machines.
12 V vehicle electrical system: The 12 V vehicle electrical system has a similar design for all hybrid vehicles that have both HV and 12 V vehicle electrical systems. It is very similar to the 12 V electrical system of a conventionally powered vehicle except for the fact that it usually does not have a starter and the power is supplied not by an alternator, but by an isolating DC DC converter from the HV machine and thus from the HV vehicle electrical system .
If the vehicle can drive or crawl electrically, all assisting functions such as power steering, cooler pumps or braking system must be operated independently of the internal combustion engine, i.e., electrically, so that they are also available when the internal combustion engine is switched off.
1 Electrical machine, 2 PWM inverter, 3 DC link capacitor,  4 Non isolating high output DC DC converter ,  5 Pre charging contactor, 6 Main contactor, 7 Pre charging resistor,  8 HV battery, 9 Electrical machine, 10 PWM inverter, 11 DC link capacitor, 12 12 V consumer, 13 12 V battery, 14 Isolating DC DC converter, 15 Air conditioning compressor,  16 PWM inverter, 17 DC link capacitor. SEB0005 5D 4 5 6 6 7 8 14 HV vehicle electrical system 1st link 2nd link DC DC 12 13 12 V electrical system 1 2 10 11 3 9 15 16 17 DC DC
Vehicle electrical systems : for externally rechargeable hybrid and electric vehicles Topology The electrical system of an externally rechargeable hybrid vehicle and uses it to charge the battery in a controlled manner. The vehicle's battery management system tells the charging device the charging output it needs. For safety and to protect against overvoltage, this charging device usually has an electrically isolated design.
Alternatively, the battery of an electric vehicle can also be charged with direct current from an externally controlled charging station. In this case, all that is required is a plug in connection to the HV battery and a communication interface between the battery management and charging station to specify the charging output.
Efficiency For electric vehicles, the efficiency of the vehicle electrical system is critical, as it has a direct effect not only on consumption, but also the range and the battery size needed. As a result, more expensive and more efficient components can reduce the total costs of the vehicle, as they make the same range possible with a smaller battery. Therefore, for many components of the vehicle electrical system, a review should be carried out to determine whether a less expensive standard component can be used or it is worthwhile to develop a new, more efficient component. Particular importance is attached to the energy demand for passenger compartment climate control.
1 Electrical machine,  2 PWM inverter,  3 DC link capacitor,  4 Pre charging contactor,  5 Main contactor,  6 Pre charging resistor,  7 HV battery,  8 12 V consumer,  9 12 V battery, 10 Isolating DC DC converter, 11 Air conditioning compressor, 12 PWM inverter, 13 DC link capacitor, 14 Charging device  .
SEB0014 3E DC AC 14 UN HV vehicle electrical system 10 8 9 12 V electrical system 1 11 12 13 2 3 4 5 5 6 7 DC DC
Charging strategy : Cyclical variation Generally, a battery is damaged and therefore its remaining service life shortened by cyclical charging and discharging . The battery is designed on the basis of power output and range and the charging strategy is adapted within the context of optimization between service life, cost, and weight of the battery on the one hand and good hybrid drivetrain efficiency and greater range for electric vehicles on the other hand.
Usually, the thermal aging processes of the battery cells are accelerated significantly at a high state of charge . Therefore, the charging strategy should avoid the combination of a high state of charge and high temperature of the cells. Operating strategy for hybrid vehicles Normally, the system attempts to keep the battery of a hybrid vehicle in an SOC window of approx. 50 to 70 %. If this window is exceeded, there can be no operating point shift of the internal combustion engine and no more recuperation.
When the lower SOC limit is usually implemented in the engine control unit or in a special hybrid control unit.
Operating strategy for electric vehicles In a pure electric vehicle, there is only one source of energy the battery. Therefore, the operating strategy must fulfill the driver's command from this source, regardless of the state of charge. Therefore, strong but less frequent cyclical variation is inevitable to attain the necessary range of the vehicle with a reasonable battery size. The SOC limits are set here in such a way that there no effects that compromise service life. Depending on the battery system, the usable SOC range is between approx. 10 % and 90 %.
PI controller Chargingpower setpoint SOC setpoint value SOC actual value Charging prohibition Discharge prohibition < SOCL > SOCmax < SOCmin Discharge prohibition Chargingpower increase Charging prohibition SEB0013 2E
journey or if a lower SOC limit value is reached of recharging the battery during the actual journey from this alternator instead of from an external source.
The range extender only has moderate rated power and delivers this as constant power with the best possible fuel consumption to the battery, which buffers the drivetrain power dynamics. There is also the possibility, subject to the appropriate drivetrain design, of coupling the internal combustion engine of the range extender in a limited speed range directly to the drivetrain and thereby delivering mechanical power to the wheels without a loss of electrical efficiency.
Operating strategy for plug in hybrid The HV charging strategy here is a mix of that of an electric vehicle and that of a hybrid vehicle. In the case of a plug in hybrid the aim for fuel economy reasons is to drive electrically as far and as frequently as possible. When the battery is exhausted, the vehicle switches to an operating strategy similar to a hybrid , the charging devices or the power output of the public power supply system are usually limiting. The first phase of charging is performed at full power; in the second phase current and power are gradually decreased until the battery end of charge voltage is reached. ________________________________ References References S. Sasaki, E. Sato, M. Okamura: The Motor Control Technologies for the Hybrid Electric Vehicle; Toyota Motor Corporation.
torque, power, current and voltage curves obtained during inverter operation. In the base speed range .
portant operating points for purely electric vehicle operation and their importance to driveability. From these the contents of three of the four requirement groups listed in Figure 4 can be derived: overload operation, continuous operation, and cycle efficiency. These groups and four others  are explained in more detail in the following.
UDC Battery voltage, UL Line to line voltage, I  Supply current from inverter to electrical machine, l  Axial length of laminated core of electrical machine, D  Outside diameter  of stator, w Number of turns.
of an electric drive 1 Torque, 2 Mechanical power, 3 Line to line voltage UL . A Base speed range, B Field weakening range.
UAE1275 1E 0 40 20 60 80 100 % 0 20 40 60 80 Speed n Torque, mechanical power, alternating voltage, alternating current % 1 3 4 2 A B Battery Inverter Electrical machine UL I UDC l D w w
torque and power curves of an electric vehicle drive. Overload operation characterizes driveability in accelerating and passing  being exceeded. Typical requirement variables are the maximum torque at low speeds, the power at high speeds, and an associated minimum operating time. The characteristic curves of maximum torque and maximum power against speed are independent of the thermal properties of the machine and are called maximum limit characteristic curves. These are determined by the electromagnetic properties of the machine, the maximum supply current, and the battery voltage.
1 Maximum limit characteristic curve, 2 60 s characteristic curve, 3 Continuous limit characteristic curve. A Maximum torque, B Continuous torque at low speeds, C Overload operation, D Maximum power at high speeds, E Continuous power at high speeds.
Overload operation Costs Strength Installation space Machine design Oscillation excitations Continuous operation Cycle efficiency Speed n Maximum acceleration Torque M UAE1276 1E UAE1277E UAE1278 2E 0 40 60 20 80 100 % 0 20 40 60 80 % 0 20 40 60 80 % Rotational speed n % Rotational speed n Torque M Power P 0 40 60 20 80 100 % 1 2 3 C C B A D E 1 2 3 a b
Continuous operation is defined by the : reaching of a component limit temperature in thermal equilibrium. Typical requirement variables are the continuous torque at low speeds and a continuous power at high speeds. The characteristic curves of maximum continuous torque and maximum continuous power against speed are called continuous limit characteristic curves. Further characteristic curves with limited periods of time can be defined between the maximal limit characteristic curve and the continuous limit characteristic curve. Reaching the required period of time is dependent on the respective initial temperature.
electrical machine and the operating point frequencies in a driving cycle. Depending on the distribution of the operating points in the cycle, other ranges are relevant to the cycle efficiency .
Oscillation excitations In order to avoid unwanted sound radiation and service life reducing oscillations, oscillation excitations in the radial and tangential directions are calculated and minimized. The effects of torque ripple in the tangential direction depend on the mechanical systems connected to the machine . The requisite detailed knowledge of this system is often not available during the design process, which is why for the most part only a maximum peak peak value of the torque time characteristic is defined in the requirements.
Efficiency in % Torque M Rotational speed n Rotational speed n Torque M a b 97 96 94 93 Frequency in the driving cycle high low 82
Strength: The electromagnetic design requirements frequently conflict with the mechanical design requirements. Narrow bars are often necessary in the core laminations to direct the torque generating magnetic flux in the desired direction. These restriction can however become critical from a mechanical perspective if they are no longer able to withstand the loads that occur at high rotational speeds. A coupled optimization, which optimizes the combination of the two functions, is necessary here. Costs The development of electrical machines as a motor vehicle drive at Bosch is geared towards projects with high quantities . In series production in this field even seemingly small cost savings per machine noticeably pay off overall. Because of the large number of competitors the target market price can only be achieved through massive cost optimization. The foundation for this is laid by a volume production design with as little materials usage as possible. The rare earth magnets in permanent field synchronous machines are, on account of the high prices of the raw materials neodymium and dysprosium, a particularly important cost factor.
From the vehicle manufacturer's standpoint the system costs of the overall drive are to the fore . In the system consideration it is sensible to optimize the components not individually and independently, but taking the overall system into account. This produces systems whose individual components are not necessarily optimum in terms of costs, but are so in terms of the overall system.
the two most important types of electrical machine for motor vehicle propulsion. Both machine types are permanent field synchronous machines with cuboidal neodymium iron boron magnet blocks which due to centrifugal force load are inserted as "buried magnets" in recesses in the laminated rotor core.
an IMG. The stator in this case consists of single tooth wound coils. These are first wound individually and then pressed into the stator housing. The single toothwound coils are contacted via the contact carrier. To this end the wire ends of the single tooth wound coils are bent onto and connected with the respective contacting rail. The HV connection is joined to the contact carrier. The completed stator is secured for example by means of lugs in the transmission housing of the internal combustion engine. The inside diameter of the transmission housing is slightly larger than the outside diameter of the stator housing in such a way that a gap is formed between the two. This gap is sealed with the aid of seals and forms the cooling jacket for liquid cooling.
The heart of the rotor is the rotor carrier. This is usually hollow on account of the very limited installation space. Further components, such as for example a clutch, the torsional vibration damper or hydrodynamic converters, are mounted inside the rotor carrier.
1 Stator housing, 2 Contact carrier, 3 Single tooth wound coil, 4 HV connection, 5 Rotor carrier, 6 Rotor laminations, 7 Resolver wheel, 8 Permanent magnet, 9 Support ring. SAE1322Y SAE1323Y 3 1 4 5 6 8 9 7 2
typical SMG as a "stand alone machine" with water jacket cooling. The drive end end shield with the shaft end can be installed. The rotor bearings are located in the end shields.
important types of electrical machines used in hybrid and electric vehicles. In hybrid vehicles a small installation space is for the most part decisive. This requirement can best be fulfilled with a permanent field synchronous machine . The biggest drawbacks of this machine type are the relatively expensive rare earth magnets in the rotor and the danger of these magnets being demagnetized.
Today's pure electric vehicles also contain induction or asynchronous machines . Asynchronous machines with squirrel cage rotors are characterized by simple, robust construction, but often require rotor cooling due to the additionally occurring rotor heat losses due to current. A very interesting alternative is the electrically excited synchronous machine, which on account of controllable rotor magnetization achieves particularly high efficiency levels and can manage on particularly little supply current. These advantages can lead to lower system costs and reduced energy consumption.
The switched reluctance machine and its inherent susceptibility to noise generation.
use as traction drives in electric and hybrid vehicles in view of general considerations. Ultimately, the classic machine types are favored: asynchronous machine since these best fulfill the functional and economical requirements in the field of electrification. Which of these three machine types is the right solution in any concrete application case can only be ascertained by means of a detailed comparison in which
This comparison was conducted on the example of an electric vehicle . The result is shown in the form of maximum limit characteristic curves with referred axis quantities in Figure 9. The abscissa represents the rotational speed referred to the maximum machine speed, the ordinate the mechanical drive power referred to the maximum available electric power. The differences between the three machine types on account of the principles involved can be clearly recognized after the maximum mechanical power is reached.
Technology PSM Permanent field synchronous machine ESM Electrically excited synchronous machine SRM Switched reluctance machine ASM Asynchronous machine Functioning principle Synchronous Synchronous Synchronous Asynchronous Torque density Very high Very high High High Improvement in efficiency at high torque  low speed high speed  low torque high speed  low torque high speed  low torque Potential Minimum installation space No rotor cooling High efficiency Low supply current demand Very simple rotor design Simple rotor design Rotor cooling No/simple rotor cooling Additional rotor cooling possibly required No/simple rotor cooling Additional rotor cooling possibly required Risks Magnet price Demagnetization Short circuit resistance Current transformer system, rotor Speed strength Noise Outlay, power electronics High current demand Rotor heating SAE1324 1Y M n M n M n M n
the ASM is less suited to drive cases : which also require high power at maximum speed. This is basically the case in expressway/interstate driving close to the vehicle's top speed.
Permanent field synchronous machine Permanent field synchronous machine The characteristic curve of the permanent field synchronous machine and the manifestation of the reluctance torque of the magnetic circuit offers plenty of scope in the layout of the characteristic curve. The PSM is therefore highly suitable for universal use and is the preferred solution for drives with high power and torque densities, provided the expensive rare earth magnets permit economic feasibility of the drive.
Electrically excited synchronous machine Electrically excited synchronous machine The electrically excited synchronous machine , and whether the effort and outlay associated with rotor cooling and mechanical strength at higher speeds justify its use as a driving machine.
Particularities of the machine types Particularities of the machine types Aside from the immediate properties which are derived from the characteristic curve, further particularities are to be noted in the machine types: In both synchronous machines requirements with regard to limiting the steady state and dynamic short circuit current dramatically influence the design specifically at high speeds. Small short circuit currents necessitate particularly with the PSM low power at maximum speed.
In asynchronous machines much higher losses occur in the rotor. For this reason, active rotor cooling is for the most part necessary to achieve acceptable thermal conditions. Solutions with direct cooling of the short circuiting rings in the rotor by oil or shaft cooling by water are possible here. Essentially, the choice of the electrical machine suitable for the concrete drive case is the result of an overall evaluation of technical and economic characteristics which cannot generally or readily be transferred from one application case to the other. This statement also reflects the fact that all three favored electrical machine types have been developed by different vehicle manufacturers to series maturity and are used in electrified drivetrains. A standard solution is not discernible at the present time.
Influencing factors on : operational performance The operational performance of the electric drive is influenced by the battery, the inverter, and the electrical machine. Important influencing factors on the maximum limit characteristic curve of the ASM and the PSM are presented in the following. Diagrams are only shown for the PSM, since the ASM and the PSM perform similarly in most cases.
Battery voltage A higher battery voltage increases the maximum line to line voltage UL. This increases the specific speed of the drive .
The battery voltage accordingly has no influence on the maximum torque in the base speed range. The power in the field weakening range on the other hand rises with the battery voltage. For the PSM the relationship is approximately linear and for the ASM approximately square. For the maximum limit characteristic curves in Figure 10 it is presupposed that the battery can also provide the necessary power for the maximum limit characteristic curve. Otherwise the achievable power on the maximal limit characteristic curve is limited by the battery power. Maximum supply current of the inverter The maximum supply current has no influence on the power at maximum speed, since the current limit of the inverter is usually not reached here . The maximum torque in the base speed range on the other hand rises with the maximum supply current. Disregarding saturation, the relationship for the PSM is linear and for the ASM square. With a greater supply current the losses on the maximum limit characteristic curve also increase, above all in the base speed range. This reduces the permissible overload time, i.e., the time until the electrical machine's temperature limit is reached.
a 1 2 3 3 4 1 4 5 2 5 6 6 0 40 80 120 Nm kW Speed Speed Torque Mechanical power 0 30 60 90 b 0 500 100 200 300 400 A V Supply current Line to line voltage 0 60 20 40 80 100 0 rpm 6000 12000 0 rpm 6000 12000 1 3 / UAE1282 1E
Axial length of the electrical : machine's laminated core The maximum torque in the base speed range is proportional to the axial length of the laminated core . For the PSM the power remains virtually constant at high speeds. For the ASM on the other hand the power decreases at high speeds with increasing axial length. The cause is the increased leakage inductance.
a 0 40 80 120 160 Nm kW 0 rpm 6000 Speed Speed 12000 0 rpm 6000 12000 Torque Mechanical power 0 20 40 60 80 b 0 100 200 300 400 A V Supply current Line to line voltage 1 3  0 40 20 60 80 / 1 2 3 3 1 2 4 4 6 5 5 6 UAE1284 1E
4 5 6 4 6 5 a 0 40 80 120 160 Nm kW 0 20 40 60 80 100 b 0 100 200 300 400 500 A V 0 40 30 10 20 60 70 50 1 2 3 3 1 2 0 rpm 4000 8000 12000 0 rpm 4000 8000 12000 Line to line voltage 1 3 / Supply current Speed Speed Torque Mechanical power UAE1286 1E
duced if the number of turns is increased. : In all, the winding resistance increases such that the losses on the maximum limit characteristic curve increase, above all in the base speed range. This reduces the permissible overload time, i.e., the time until the electrical machine's temperature limit is reached.
be noted that the maximum supply current of the inverter and the number of turns of the electrical machine have remained the same. With increasing outside diameter the current density decreases and the overload time increases.
Higher power is obtained for the PSM in the field weakening range. For the ASM the power in the field weakening range can also increase depending on design, but can also remain constant.
Depending on the modulation technique used, the battery voltage is utilized differently and there are different voltage limits . k therefore has no influence on the maximum torque in the basespeed range. With higher turns ratios the voltage limit is only reached at greater speeds so that higher power is achieved in the field weakening range.
a 0 40 80 60 20 120 100 140 Nm kW 0 rpm 6000 12000 0 rpm 6000 12000 0 20 40 60 80 100 b 0 100 200 300 400 A V 0 40 20 60 80 1 2 3 3 1 2 Torque Mechanical power Speed Speed Supply current Line to line voltage 1 3 / 4 5 6 4 6 5 UAE1287 1E
is doubled. To obtain the starting characteristic curve again, first the number of turns w must be doubled .
Adapting the number of turns produces in both cases  constant. It must be noted that the number of turns can only be changed in discrete steps and therefore deviations can arise in reality.
section of an electrical machine in which the most important assemblies are indicated and the associated types of loss are assigned to these.
Heat losses due to current Heat losses due to current which in the first approximation are proportional to the square of the effective value of the current occur in the stator winding, in the rotor case of an asynchronous machine, and in the excitation winding of an electrically excited synchronous machine. For optimized designs, current displacement and proximity effects as well as parasitic circulating currents in parallel and delta connections must additionally be taken into account.
Here B denotes the flux density and f its frequency. Because of the high speeds and the accompanying high frequencies in automobile drives, the task of minimizing the eddy current losses in particular poses a huge challenge. This is usually achieved by accordingly optimizing the lamination section and by using particularly thin core laminations which are insulated against each other and stacked in the axial direction to form the laminated core.
Parasitic effects such as for example harmonic fields or harmonic components generated by the inverter can generate significant eddy current losses both in the stator and in the rotor which must be taken into consideration in the design process. Eddy current losses Further eddy current losses can occur in the magnet blocks of a permanent field synchronous machine and in structural parts due to the magnetic alternating fields generated by the machine. Of particular importance here are the eddy current losses in the magnets, since these directly heat the magnetic blocks which are thermally for the most part poorly connected to the cooling system and consequently under high field load can lead to irreversible demagnetization.
Friction losses The rotational movement of the rotor causes bearing friction and windage losses, which on the one hand reduce efficiency and on the other hand can even result in unacceptable heating in the bearing itself. Particularly in hybrid vehicles, in which the electrical machine always rotates but is not always actively in use, the friction losses have a significant influence on cycle efficiency.
machine 1 Iron losses in the stator lamination, 2 Eddy current losses in the housing, 3 Ohmic losses in the rotor cage , 6 Iron losses in the laminated rotor core. 2 1 3 4 5 6 UAE1289 1Y
Cooling of the electrical : machine The losses are dissipated in the machine to cooling media. A powerful cooling system protects the individual components against overheating. Insufficient dissipation of the individual heat losses from the electrical machine restricts the permissible continuous power. In overload operation the thermal mass  limits the time until a limit temperature is reached.
Water cooling Water cooling The type most commonly encountered is water cooling, i.e., integration in a water/ glycol circuit, which can also be used to Cooling the power electronics. Here the stator core is encased in a water cooling jacket.
Oil cooling Oil cooling Oil cooling is advisable for integration in the manual transmission or final drive differential. Cooling is also effected at the stator jacket. But the rotor and the stator winding can also be cooled directly.
Air cooling Air cooling Air cooling is also used. Here air flows through a fan via large area cooling fins along the stator jacket or even axially along the rotor.
The cooling effect is crucially determined not just by the cooling type, but also by the coolant temperature and the coolant throughflow.
of an electrical machine Designations, see Figure 17. Percentage values in the top half apply to the operating state mentioned above. Values in the bottom half apply to the operating state mentioned below.
In the case of jacket cooling the main stator heat flow proceeds from the winding via the stator slot insulating paper to the stator core and from there to the housing with cooling duct. A specific role is assigned to winding cooling here. Electric insulation by paint, impregnating resin and insulating paper causes heavily directionalized thermal insulation. Cooling optimization here requires the interaction of electromagnetic design, production development, and thermal design.
Heat dissipation via the stator winding overhangs to the cooling housing by air can be increased by fans or additional oil cooling. Alternatively, a heat conducting connection by casting materials can be established.
The rotor is thermally connected via the air gap to the stator and convectively connected via the side faces to the housing. It is heated or cooled by the stator, depending on the operating situation.
picture) primarily heat losses due to current are effective; at high speed iron losses are predominant. In this way, the different cooling paths work on the basis of speed.
Thermal limitation When the electrical machine has a high power density, the maximum power is typically above the continuous power. Protection of the components against overheating is then ensured by a limiting function of the inverter's activation software. Limitation is performed typically for the limit temperatures of the stator and the rotor. In the case of the stator the insulation resistance limits the maximum winding temperature .
Determination of the stator and magnet temperature during operation is subject to tolerances and requires a reduced control limit. Figure 20 shows by way of example the continuous limit characteristic curve of a water cooled PSM. Limitation for the stator temperature is effective here. Lowering the coolant temperature increases the drivable continuous torque.
limit characteristic curve of an electrical machine Continuous limit characteristic curves with variation of the cooling fluid temperature.  Cooling fluid throughflow is in all cases 6 l/min. 1 Maximum characteristic curve for torque, 2 Continuous torque for 65 degC, 3 Continuous torque for 75 degC, 4 Continuous torque for 85 degC.
used for supplying direct voltage in automotive engineering. The direct voltage can, depending on the drive system, be supplied directly by the traction battery or via an upstream DC DC converter for voltage adaptation.
Requirements Compared with industrial inverters, inverters used in electric vehicles are subject to much more critical requirements or demands with regard to coolant temperatures, environmental factors , and in particular electrical and functional safety. Currently the most challenging application for an inverter is its use in plug in hybrids because here the installation spaces and the coolant temperatures are rendered particularly critical by the additional presence of an internal combustion engine and a traction battery.
All the components in the HV circuit , the inverter housing, and the control circuits connected to the 12 V vehicle electrical system.
Performance classes Electric drives are used in vehicles of widely differing performance classes. The drive power per drive in the passenger car sector ranges between 60 and 200 kW for a battery end of charge voltage typically of 450 V. The three phase machine currents ranges between 250 and 600 A. Two or three drives may be present in the vehicle, depending on the application.
Batteries with a voltage of 800 V are used for passenger cars in the upper performance segment and in the commercial vehicle sector. The attainable power is therefore 250 to 600 kW at similar currents.
The current intensity is limited with the power module technology used. Threephase current systems with six phases can also be used with appropriately lower current intensity for high power.
Function and circuitry: Three phase current system The inverter power switches "pulse" the direct voltage  machines there are at least three winding phases which are supplied with alternating currents that are symmetrically offset in relation to each other, the so called three phase current system.
to the positive polarity are called "highside switches" and those connected to the negative polarity are called "low side switches". These six switches in all form a three phase bridge connection. The combination of a high side switch and a low side switch is called a half bridge. A three phase bridge connection therefore consists of three half bridges.
Design variations of power switches Depending on the required current carrying capacity, each of the power switches can consist of one or more parallel connected individual transistors. IGBT transistors  are required for free wheeling and recovery time ranges of the current characteristics. In recuperation mode these diodes direct the current generated by the winding phases to the battery.
It transpires that in the medium term power transistors made of SiC and to reduce losses. These have MOS transistor properties, are consequently reverse conducting and therefore do not require an antiparallel connected diode.
Switching the machine currents When the inverter is clocked, the voltages at the machine supply lines jump . In view of the inductances in the electrical machine, the alternating currents in the windows however have a strongly smoothed course, ideally a sinusoidal shape. The clock frequency T is for the most part constant, typically 10 kHz. The clock frequency can, depending on the operating point, be reduced in order to reduce switching losses in the inverter and additional losses in the electrical machine. This however results in a low frequency noise excitation. The noise level may rise, depending on the natural frequencies of the mechanism.
v Phase voltage , ot Angular frequency.
currents in the machine supply lines essentially determines the machine torque, the frequency of the current determines the rotational speed. The sum total of the voltage time phases produces in conjunction with the phase currents a continuous active power flow on the DC side of the inverter.
Function of the link Parasitic inductances in the mechanical circuit arrangement create voltage peaks at the power switches during commutation. The link capacitor is required to reduce these voltage peaks and the AC component in the battery voltage and to smooth the power pulses in the direction of the traction battery. It must meet strict demands with regard to low inductance design, low losses, and high current carrying capacity. Film capacitors which offer a good compromise between performance and cost are currently used here. Power switches and link must be set up in a low inductance arrangement so that the resulting commutation circuit can achieve rapid current build up and current reduction in the transistors of the power switches and free wheeling diodes with simultaneously low voltage peaks.
Overvoltage protection Overvoltage protection Overvoltage protection in the event of a fault with a permanent field synchronous machine as the result of its rotational speed induced voltage is particularly critical. In the event of an inverter control failure, the induced machine voltages are rectified via the free wheeling diodes of the PWR inverter. When the battery is connected a braking torque builds up at the machine at higher speeds. Opening the battery contactor does prevent this braking torque, but results in the power switches being destroyed by excessive voltages.
A low resistance failure of a power switch transistor gives rise to an unacceptable braking torque at the electrical machine here as well.
A safe drive state can only then be achieved by opening the battery contactors and all pole short circuiting of the electrical machine terminals. The three high side switches or the three low side switches are short circuited, depending on the type of fault involved. In the event of a switching transistor fault with a conducting failure, the neighboring switches are conductively connected; in the event of a blocking failure, the three opposite switches. It is essential to avoid a simultaneous switching through of opposite transistors, as otherwise a short circuit of the battery would occur if the battery contactors were not yet opened.
If a PSM machine has to be permanently short circuited at higher rotational speeds and the vehicle is nevertheless to be moved at a not inconsiderable speed, this constitutes a considerable thermal load on the inverter there is no short circuit current flow.
When shielding the machine supply lines it must be noted that, as a result of the different time characteristics of the phase currents, when the individual strands are shielded circulating currents can develop in the shields and across the connection elements to the inverter and the machine of a similar magnitude to the machine current. If possible, the machine supply lines should be subjected to common shielding .
the operable drive power can be selected. For this reason a low inductance design of the commutation circuit and if necessary voltage limiting protective circuits  provide for the best possible inverter performance.
Mounting While for small three phase AC drives in the vehicle three phase AC supply lines to the electrical machine and its HV connections both in electric final drive units and in transmissions for hybrid drives.
Activation and control: Function The driver adjusts the torque required for propulsion via the accelerator pedal. The aim of drive control is to make available according to the request of the higher level vehicle system an electrical machine torque that for a constant setpoint value exhibits as smooth a torque/time characteristic as possible so as not to excite the mechanical structures of the drivetrain and the vehicle to noise generation or oscillations.
Inverter control Inverter control is based on a central microcontroller .
function. Isolated measurements of the : DC link voltage and the phase currents to the machine and of the current position of the machine rotor are required for drivetorque control. For safety reasons all three phase currents are recorded although on the condition that the total current is zero only two of these would be required.
The derating functions, i.e., the thermally based measures for power reduction, are if necessary controlled from the recording of the component temperatures or the downstream observer models.
The inverter is in communication via a number of communication interfaces .
The "pilot line" is a hardware wire which forms a closed conductor loop via additional contacts at each critical HV connection point or on covers which could be opened in the vehicle. Its status is monitored for integrity by way of resistance measurement by the safety technology in the battery. The battery main contactors open in the event of a fault.
justed by means of the pulse durations : of the activation. The orientation of the space vector describes the phase angle of the system; this is adjusted by pulse duration modulated oscillation between two adjacent switching states.
The ideal representation of a threephase voltage system would be achieved if the vector moved continuously without pulse related jumps on a circular path. This is not possible for the inverter due to the few possible discrete switching states. But because the current due to the machine inductance follows a strongly smoothed voltage, it approaches a sinusoidal shape with the frequency of the voltage fundamental component. This oscillation constitutes the machine supply frequency. The sinusoidal shape could be represented more ideally by increasing the inverter pulse frequency, but this would be accompanied by an increase in inverter losses. Today's IGBT inverters for vehicles operate with a pulse frequency of around 10 kHz. In particular drive configurations  it is also possible, for reducing losses in certain operating ranges, to work with a reduced pulse frequency, particularly when the battery voltage is adapted by upstream power electronics controllers to the electric drive's power demand.
Control strategy The switch control strategy for sinusoidal supply is called SVPWM .
Control engineering implementation Control engineering implementation Electric vehicle drives have complex closed loop control circuits to reduce torque and avoid drivetrain vibrations. Current control forms the innermost, fastest circuit. Coordinating this is torque control, which derives an estimated actual torque value from measurements of stator current and current rotor position and estimation model calculations for the magnetic fluxes in the machine and the temperatures of the critical assemblies. Drive control and the real time observer simulations required considerable microcontroller power and signal acquisition precision. This actual torque value must be formed as precisely as possible because it not only is used for driving comfort purposes but also forms the basis of the drive safety concept.
Working with asynchronous machines is in terms of control engineering much simpler than using synchronous machines. Synchronous machines create their torque by "displacing" the magnetic fields of a current fed stator and a rotor equipped with magnets. It is therefore necessary here to know precisely the absolute rotor rotation angle position. Today these are usually sensed by reluctance resolvers or eddy current position sensors in combination with specialized evaluation electronics modules.
time by means of observer models using : measured values and other available data in order to operate the drive components in their safe operating ranges. If critical limits are reached, limitation strategies intervene to reduce loads gradually and thereby prevent damage to the components.
Closed loop control circuit influences Closed loop control circuit influences Closed loop control circuit influences for taking account of the elasticity of specific drivetrains  with the electric drive heavily involved in braking, the braking functions will also in part be integrated in drive control in order to avoid communication dead times.
Software and functional safety Requirements The inverter software must satisfy requirements that are comparable with those of an internal combustion engine. As well as a vehicle immobilizer and safeguarding against unintended movement and acceleration by the three level concept must be realized here, depending on vehicle size, drive power, frontor rear wheel drive, and if necessary the use of sufficiently safe signals from other ECUs in the vehicle. These safety levels are essentially achieved by redundancies in the sensor system, the supply, and the software, if necessary also with diversity. In other words, not only is the system redundant in design, but also different solutions are used.
Three level concept The three level concept , its memories, and the function of the sensors are monitored, whereby test operations are fed in. An error counter in the assigned watchdog hardware module aggregates registered errors and if necessary triggers the "safe state" of the electric drive. This is currently defined in the case of a PSM machine as its three phase all pole short circuit.
UAE1319D Level 1 Driving functions Level 2 Monitoring of control functions Level 3 mC monitoring Output signal Watchdog Input signal Functional software State coordinator for the electric drive Torque limitation Calculation of requested torque Control of electrical machine Basic software Output driver Sensor signal evaluation Monitoring DC/DC coordinator Hardware encapsulation Communication Calculation of output signals Information service
are introduced in the components used. This does not necessarily have to be realized in an ECU . However, this calls for the appropriate level of co ordination and each supplying party must provide its specific monitoring function. The basic software is supplied in each case by the equipment manufacturer.
Equipment mechanics Mounting the inverter Today's inverters are for the most part tested devices with cable connection or designed for directly mounting on the electrical machine or transmission housing. A market for tested inverter assemblies seems to be emerging. In which partitioning and installation situation an inverter is used is in part specific to each vehicle manufacturer. Standardization in the market is difficult to conceive.
Cooling The loss generating inverter assembly is in most cases liquid cooled with coolant mixed with glycol. The typical volumetric flow is usually max. 10 liters per minute, the maximum temperature depending on the application is between 65 degC and 85 degC.
Inverter design concepts The heart of the inverter, the power switch module, comes in a variety of designs. Bond frame module Bond frame module The bond frame module is sintered with semiconductor chips or soldered to an insulating ceramic metallized on both sides . The top surfaces of the chips are contacted with thick wire bonds or with soldered or sintered flat conductors. The entire module is passivated with gel.
Mold module Mold module The semiconductor chips are soldered or sintered to lead frames, the top surfaces are contacted with lead frames. The entire module is packed with transfer mold. Owing to the size, it is for the most part designed as a half bridge module, but sometimes also as a single switch. Insulation from the cooler is provided by laminate or intermediate ceramic layers.
Cast module: Cast module This module has the same design as the mold or the bond frame module, but is passivated by synthetic resin casting compound.
Soldered bond frame modules Soldered bond frame modules This technology is no longer state of the art in that the risk of solder fatigue significantly limits service life and load capacity. Low temperature silver sintering Low temperature silver sintering Alternatively, there is a trend in chip bonding towards low temperature silver sintering with significantly longer service life. Mold and casting technologies likewise offer significantly longer service life for soldering joints.
Heat dissipation Pin fin concept Pin fin concept Virtually all of today's power modules make use of a pin fin heat sink made of aluminum or copper for heat dissipation. These are baseplates onto which the power modules are mounted and whose other side projects with so called pin fins . Related measures to improve heat dissipation are used in other cases.
Because an inverter uses power from 100 to 200 kW at 96 to 98 % efficiency, losses of several kilowatts must be dissipatable.
are also connected with the other side of the water path. This cooler has the advantages of higher pressure resistance and better heat dissipation.
4 IGBT semiconductor chips, 5 Phase connection, 6 Top surface clip, 7 Insulating layer, 8 Half bridge power module, 9 Pin fin cooler plate. UAE1321Y 5 6 2 3 3x 4 1 a b c 7 8 9
the power modules .
Commutation circuit Commutation circuit The busbar of the commutation circuit between the link capacitor and the DC inputs of the power module must be designed to be as low inductance as possible, i.e., the potential surfaces must be routed as closely as possible to each other and the current paths during commutation between the switches should encompass as few surfaces as possible.
Gate driver circuit Gate driver circuit The gate driver circuit is placed as close to the power switches as possible, but the electromagnetic fields for the most part must be shielded in the area of the power modules so that there can be no interference with the control circuits even in the event of extreme transient currents.
HV connections HV connections The HV connections also deserve special attention since they too are affected by losses and adequate heat dissipation must be provided for or the creation of heat loss should be avoided as far as possible .
________________________________ References References ISO 26262: Road vehicles Functional safety.
1 HV connections DC and AC, HV DC for small drive , 2 Inverter assembly with pin fin water cooler, power modules, link capacitor, gate driver circuits, phase current measurement, 3 Liquid cooler, 4 Microcontroller control circuit, 5 DC DC converter.
Voltage levels Conversion of high to low voltages Conversion of high to low voltages Every vehicle has for power supply purposes a 12 V electrical system, consisting of a current source, an energy accumulator/storage device . This is also the case for electric and hybrid vehicles, which have a traction battery with a voltage level of 400 V or 800 V.
Whereas an alternator serves as the current source in conventional vehicles with internal combustion engines and solely a 12 V vehicle electrical system, a supply from the traction battery via a DC DC converter is used in electric and hybrid vehicles. This system converts high direct voltage DC DC converters.
Non isolating : DC DC converters Basic design and operating principle DC DC converters essentially consist of switches, diodes, and energy storage devices .
states: switched on  and keeping this constant, a square wave voltage is obtained whose components UE and 0 are dependent on the duty ratio t during a period. The ratio of t to T is defined as the duty cycle D and provides the relationship between input and output voltages.
voltage transformer a) Design with two MOSFETs, b) Function as down controller from 48 V to 12 V, b) Function as up controller from 12 V to 48 V. T MOSFET, C Capacitor, L Coil, V MOSFET functioning as a diode, S MOSFET functioning as a switch.
such a DC DC converter with two MOSFETs arranged as a half bridge. This circuitry can also be seen in Figure 3. For the step down converter the upper MOSFET is used as the switch, the lower MOSFET operates as the diode . This arrangement corresponds exactly to Figure 1a.
For the step up converter the lower MOSFET operates as the switch, while the upper MOSFET operates as the diode . This corresponds to the mirrored arrangement of Figure 1b.
In other words, the DC DC converter can operate from 48 V to 12 V as a stepdown converter and from 12 V to 48 V as a step up converter. Only the switch and rectifier functions change between the two MOSFETs.
For higher currents a number of phases are connected in parallel to create multiphase converters. These operate with the same switching frequency, but with a phase shift. This on the one hand splits the power and on the other hand delivers benefits through the superimposition of the voltage ripples of the phases with the result that the converter switching frequency virtually increases. Smaller voltage ripples and benefits in filtering are thereby obtained.
phase consists of two MOSFETs and one inductor. The "filter" functions are jointly used by all the phases. Even the safety switches which isolate the converter from the vehicle electrical system in the event of a fault are jointly used and therefore feature only once per side. There is if nec 
1 Electrical machine . 30, 31, 40 Terminal designations.
SAE1326 1E 1 40 between the traction battery and the inverter. The traction battery has a voltage that is dependent on the state of charge; this has a noticeable impact on the maximum available drive power. To prevent this, the traction electrical system DC DC converter regulates the inverter input voltage to a stable voltage, regardless of the changing battery voltage.
Because traction electrical system DC DC converters are designed for a much higher power range than 48 V 12 V voltage transformers and operated with lower switching frequencies than 48 V 12 V converters.
electrically isolated DC DC converter. Operating principle Operating principle First the input direct voltage to become the output direct voltage.
bridge is activated with a duty cycle of 50 % and the output voltage is adjusted via the phase relation of the two halfbridges.
Both methods have benefits and drawbacks; phase shifting has gained acceptance for isolating DC DC converters in vehicles. Accordingly, this method is referred to as the phase shifted full bridge  can be used together with the 50 % operation of the half bridges for a soft switching operation of the DC DC converter. This lowers the switching losses of the semiconductors so that efficiency and switching frequency can be increased. A higher switching frequency has a favorable impact on the installation space and the costs of the passive components.
Typical switching frequencies range be : tween 70 and 100 kHz and sometimes also around 140 to 145 kHz. The choice of these frequencies avoids the range around 125 kHz in which radio systems for vehicle access or tire pressure monitoring frequently operate. From 150 kHz upwards the restrictions imposed by EMC regulations governing emitted interference take effect such that the switching frequency should be much lower.
Further functions of the DC DC converter Further functions of the DC DC converter in the vehicle in the vehicle Most of the methods used are also capable of reverse operation and consequently can supply energy from the 12 V vehicle electrical system to the traction electrical system. This is used for two functions. The first function is for precharging the capacitors in the traction electrical system; this saves on costs and installation space for the charging contactors in the traction battery. The second function of reverse operation is the test pulse for the 12 V battery. Here the 12 V battery is briefly subjected to a discharge current; the HV battery absorbs the energy as charging current. From this the battery sensor determines the current performance of the battery. Future functions will promote the redundancy of the energy supply to the 12 V vehicle electrical system so that safety relevant consumers and their function in spite of a single fault in the DC DC converter can continue to be supplied with energy at least for a certain amount of time.
DC DC converters of high  voltages to 48 V DC DC converters with input voltages of several hundred volts and an output voltage of 48 V are very similar in their design to DC DC converters with a 12 V output. Essentially the transformation ratio of the transformer is changed. Furthermore, the secondary side circuits must be adapted to the higher output voltage. The rectifiers need a higher reverse voltage, the filter capacitors need higher dielectric strength, and the sensors for current and voltage must be adapted to the other current and voltage.
Because primarily current is a crucial design parameter for DC DC converters, higher output power can be achieved with little additional outlay thanks to the higher voltage compared with the 12 V DC DC converter.
to the vehicle ; the voltage is transformed from alternating current to direct current in the on board charger inside the vehicle. The traction battery can be charged with this direct current.
a) AC charging .
Integrated charging concept: Aside from standalone chargers there are also charging concepts in which components already installed in the vehicle . Because for the most part the inverter is the integral component of such concepts, the term inverter charging is also used in this context. Such chargers are however generally not electrically isolated and for that reason they will not be discussed further here.
Direct current charging Direct current , and for that reason weight and vibration strength requirements are less relevant. The charging station ascertains the desired charging current by communicating with the vehicle. Wires carried in the charging cable are used for communication.
start automatically with the vehicle appropriately positioned on the charger. This transformer assumes the function of the transformer in the DC DC converter . The primary coil is located in the charger, the secondary coil is situated with the rectifier in the vehicle. Requirements The fundamental requirements imposed on an on board charger are laid down by the standards to be observed on the network side and by the vehicle side battery and safety concept requirements.
Network side requirements To ensure that a charger can be used on a worldwide scale, a voltage range of 85 to 265 V .
Vehicle side requirements On the vehicle side above all the traction battery requirements must be taken into consideration. Aside from the voltage range to be covered, stretching in current electric vehicles from 240 V to 450 V , the charger should provide as smooth a charging current as possible, i.e., with low ripple. This requirement plays a central role in single phase chargers because the charging current exhibits a strong ripple if the pulsating power consumption from the AC network is not smoothed.
Aside from the battery requirements, the safety concept of a charger plays a central role in its integration in the vehicle. Electrically isolated on board chargers are state of the art. The power supply network and the vehicle can be decoupled by means of electrical isolation, which makes it easier to bring potentially occurring insulation faults under control. This is because the vehicle body is connected to the ground conductor of the power supply network during the charging process. It should basically be pointed out that electrical isolation proves to be disadvantageous with regard to achievable efficiency.
What these new functions have in common is the required bidirectional energy transfer of the charger. This means that future chargers must be able to transfer energy not only from the supply network to the traction battery but also from the traction battery back to the network. While V2L merely permits the operation of a simple consumer  from the vehicle, V2H is concerned with the intelligent integration of the vehicle storage device in the existing domestic electrical installation in order to be able, by including the vehicle battery, to better utilize for example the electrical energy self generated by a photovoltaic system. The concept with the greatest complexity is V2G, with which parked vehicles make available some of their battery capacity for appropriate payment in order to participate in the energy control market so as ultimately to get rid of the expensive peak load power stations and at the same improve the stability of the power supply system through a better balance between generation and consumption. For the V2G approach to work, sufficient numbers of vehicles must always be connected to the network, which presupposes an appropriate degree of market penetration by electromobility.
The charging power figures of today's on board chargers are based on the country specific conditions of connection to the public low voltage network. They utilize from one up to all three network phases of the existing three phase AC networks in the power supply network. The charge power here ranges from 3.6 kW .
Basic design and operating principle The basic design of a charger is explained in the following with reference to a single phase charger. Figure 3 shows a state of the art two stage charger consisting of a step up converter based PFC rectifier . Rather, the specifics of the established circuit topologies when used in a charger are elaborated here.
er factor correction which adheres to the : legally stipulated limit values for current harmonics in the range of 100 Hz to 2 kHz and makes possible a power factor close to the value 1.
The PFC rectifier presented here consists of a conventional step up converter with an upstream bridge rectifier which rectifies the network side alternating voltage. For the most part step up based circuit concepts are used as power factor correction filters since these exhibit advantages over step down systems due to their continuous input current . Because of the step up converter approach, the DC link voltage must always be greater than the rectified line voltage. In conjunction with the 230 V AC network a DC link voltage of around 400 V is obtained which is referred to in the following as the input voltage for the subsequent DC DC converter stage.
The network side current characteristic of the PFC rectifier is illustrated for a continuous choke current .
The interference generated by the high frequency switching of the PFC rectifier is suppressed with the aid of a passive network filter, which for reasons of clarity is not shown in Figure 3 .
Power smoothing Located at the output of the step up converter is the DC link, which is designed as a capacitive energy storage device with the aid of electrolytic capacitors. The need for power smoothing in single phase chargers can be derived directly from the requirements of a line frequency free charging current. Because constant power cannot be drawn from the AC network, without power smoothing the pulsating power would be transferred to the output. Generally, it must be borne in mind that a constant power consumption is first possible in conjunction with a three phase AC system.
the pulsating power consumption from the AC network PB  Charging power, DE Energy when charging and discharging the DC link.
voltage characteristics of the PFC rectifier 1 Rectified line voltage, 2 Please current through step up choke, 3 Current from the network, equal to the mean current through the step up choke.  2  PB 2PB 2p p p  2 3p ot  E 0 0 Voltage, current 1 2 3 ot p 0
The characteristic of the pulsating system : power at the AC network is shown by way of example of a sinusoidal line current in phase with the line voltage in Figure 5. It must be recognized that the power input pulsates between zero and twice the mean charging power PB with double the line frequency.
The pulsating system power is smoothed in the DC link by the input and output of the excessively or insufficiently delivered power, whereby the link capacitor is continuously charged and discharged. The storage and discharge of the energy DE in the link capacitor leads to a voltage ripple in the DC link which must be taken into account in the design of the subsequent DC DC converter.
Electrical isolation An overview of isolating DC DC converters and their operating principles is provided elsewhere . But also other soft switching switching topologies, such as for example the LLC resonant converter , are suitable for use as isolating converters in a charger.
The function of the isolating DC DC converter at the charger output is, aside from decoupling the vehicle from the supply network, to provide as smooth a charging current as possible to the traction battery. To this end the converter sets the requested charging current from the DC link voltage stipulated by the PFC rectifier.
Three phase chargers On advantage of the analyzed single phase charger is the possibility of threephase enhancement. Owing to the electrical isolation utilized a number of such designed chargers can be connected in parallel at the output and operated from different network phases so that a threephase system is obtained by wiring up a single phase system accordingly.
But, essentially, pure three phase circuit systems also exist. In the case of such systems it must be noted that the circuit topology, aside from providing threephase operation, must typically also be able to charge from the single phase AC network because currently access to the three phase AC network across the board cannot be assumed.
P E 10 15 20 25 30 35 kWh 40 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 kW EV HEV PHEV   1606 Electrics for electric and hybrid drives Requirements Hybrid and electric vehicles require a battery as an energy accumulator or storage device to operate the electrical machine. The traction battery in modern electric vehicles often accounts for more than two thirds of the weight, size and cost of all components in the electric drivetrain. Therefore, the main challenge for the future is to improve and optimize the battery in terms of these three criteria.
There are essentially three different voltage ranges. In the LEV segment  and safety switches, it makes up a usable battery system.
The requirements described below must be taken into account when developing and designing the cells and other components in the battery system.
Safety The safety of vehicle occupants and the environment must be guaranteed in all situations. This applies to hazards that result from the electrochemical properties of the battery, for example, preventing fire. It must also take electrical safety into account, particularly in batteries with voltages larger than 60 V.
respective characteristics and the ratio of performance P to energy E. This results in various requirements for the cells used. Various cell sizes and designs are required to be able to cover all vehicle segments.
Operation in the automotive sector requires a service life usually lasting more than ten years or a running performance of typically 250,000 km. In purely electric vehicles, approximately 3,000 complete charging cycles occur throughout the life of the vehicle, while applications in hybrid vehicles often have over a million partial charging cycles. The largest challenge by far is to reduce the costs with the goal of reaching total costs comparable to those in systems with internal combustion engines. Storage technologies Today, lithium ion are still used in isolated cases. However, it is to be expected that these will be gradually replaced by lithium based battery systems.
Nickel metal hydride technology Electrochemical principle Electrochemical principle In an NiMH cell .
SME0686 5Y 2 a b 1 3 4 R I 5 K A Li. The following reactions take place during the discharging process; these are reversed during the charging process.
Application Application Nickel metal hydride batteries have already been in use as traction batteries for a few years, in particular for hybrid vehicles. They deliver high currents and have a high charging capacity while simultaneously being low in weight. The primary disadvantage of cells in nickel metal hydride technology, however, is the lower energy density at a specific power that is also usually lower compared to lithium ion batteries. Nickel metal hydride cells achieve a specific energy of up to 80 Wh/kg at a voltage of typically 1.25 V per cell. Nickel metal hydride cells also have higher self discharge than lithium ion cells , limiting their use to devices with short downtimes.
electrode, ). Graphite , each constituent making up around a third of the overall compound. Lithium ions are exchanged during the charging and discharging process via the electrolyte between the anode and the cathode. The cathode and the anode are insulated against each other by the ion permeable separator.
Depending on the anode used .
Application Application The lithium ion battery is characterized by a high energy density and thermal stability. The nominal voltage is around 3.7 V per cell, where the voltage limits during use are between around 2.8 V and 4.2 V. The simultaneous optimization to a high output and energy density is a technical challenge. A high power density requires large electrode surfaces with low resistance conductors, while a high energy density requires the opposite: compact electrodes with a large amount of active material. Typical characteristic values of today's automotive cells include 5,000 W/ kg for the specific performance of power cells and 180 Wh/kg for the specific energy of energy cells. Lithium ion systems with a higher specific energy are in development .
System monitoring System monitoring Lithium ion systems compared to other technologies require more elaborate system monitoring and control systems using a battery management system. A lithium ion battery must be kept within strictly defined charge, current and temperature limits for service life and safety reasons. In particular, lithium ion cells do not tolerate overcharging. A battery management system is used to prevent this.
Service life Service life The service life of electrochemical cells depend in an existing chemical system on the following parameters: number of cycles, depth of discharge, temperature, and mechanical load. Above all processes such as the formation of coatings, irreversible compounds, cracking, and loosening of the active material due to changes in volume take place at the electrodes. These processes manifest themselves electrically in an increase in the internal resistance, which results in reduced power and a reduction of the energy content that can be drawn. The definition of end of life  in a specific application depends on the boundary conditions of that applications; these are primarily the demands imposed on the operation of vehicles. Further developments Further developments It is to be expected that cells with innovative separator systems or based on electrochemical approaches, such as lithium sulfur or lithium air, are able to provide significantly higher energy and power densities at equal or even lower costs. However, systems based on this are still being researched. The capability for mass production for use in the automotive industry has yet to be proven.
Module:... Cooling system interface with the vehicle Housing Data interface High current connections Highcurrent wiring harness Internal data bus Battery management system Module Module Cell Cooling system Sensor technology SME0700 2E 1610 Electrics for electric and hybrid drives Basic structure of a battery system Traction batteries also differ in their internal structure due to each of the different technical requirements and individual installation situations in the vehicle. However, most follow a similar basic concept, which is depicted below.
A battery system usually consists of multiple modules, each of which, in turn, contains multiple cells. The modules are connected to each other via a high voltage wiring harness and are integrated together with the battery management system and the . The battery management system can be situated outside the battery housing.
Components of a lithium ion battery system Lithium ion cells Depending on the application, a drive battery consists of battery cells, ranging from ten to one hundred and, in individual cases, even thousands, which are connected in series or in parallel. Here, cells are used in three different designs for use in automotive industry. Designs Designs Cells with cylindrical metal housing have major cost advantages in manufacturing when compared to the other designs.
Prismatic cells with a housing made of laminated metal foil have a particularly homogeneous temperature distribution and permit highly compact battery systems of flexible sizes.
It is still uncertain whether one of the three cell types will prevail for automotive applications. Currently, there are examples of all three designs. There are global efforts to standardize the types of cell housing for automotive applications as well.
a) Cells with a cylindrical metal case, b) Prismatic cells with case made  of laminated metal foil  Prismatic hardcase cell.
hardcase cell 1 Positive terminal , 4 Current collector, 5 Cell case, 6 Current collector, 7 Cell winding with anode, cathode and separator.
matic hardcase cell. The active materials required for the chemical process in the anode must be taken to ensure that this process is not triggered by improper operation. This is the function of battery management.
Mechanical and electric components Cells have to be interconnected in a suitable form and mechanically integrated for use in vehicles. This accounts for the mechanical and electrical safety requirements that are particularly applicable for batteries with high voltage. Typical automotive industry requirements also apply here, both in use .
Module: Module The module is usually the first integration level of cells for a battery pack. Here, a different number of cells is connected in series depending on the cell type. A parallel connection of cells makes it possible to deliver greater energy contents without increasing the system voltage. Usually, care has to be taken to ensure that a module voltage of 60 V is not exceeded in order to prevent high voltage requirements at the module level.
The cells are mechanically integrated into a network and their terminals are connected by a high voltage cable harness. Additionally, sensors for temperature, voltage and current measurement and evaluation electronics are frequently integrated into the module . The focus here is to ensure the most compact design engineering possible that allows flexible, cost effective and high quality battery production.
While small battery systems can only consist of one module, battery packs for electric vehicles often use over ten modules. The modules are connected to each other electrically via a high voltage cable harness.
Housing Housing The battery housing, along with holding together the cells and protecting them from mechanical loads, is also used for contact protection against high voltages. On the outside of the battery housing, there are high voltage connections for connecting to the electric drivetrain, which can be disconnected from the supply by a safety switch when the battery is removed, a communication interface for data exchange with the higher level vehicle control unit for the electric drive assumes these tasks. It is usually implemented in a control unit located inside the battery. However, individual functions can also be assumed by external control units.
Operation The battery management system determines the instantaneous battery parameters and stores these if necessary to be able to run fault analysis or else for decision guidance for later applications outside the vehicle in the vehicle's electric drivetrain. The vehicle control unit controls the power electronics in the electric drivetrain or the charging device based on the information sent by the battery management system to configure a corresponding charging process.
The battery management system protects the cells by preventing or reducing the current flow in cases when the battery is overcharged, the safe operating window is exited due to overvoltage or undervoltage, or in the event of excess or insufficient temperature. This occurs by instructing consumers to switch off the vehicle control unit in case of emergency by shutting down the battery on its own. Even if the battery itself has to be assigned to the electrochemical domain, the functional safety standard  for electrical and electronic components must be taken into account when developing the battery's safety concept for the battery management system. Safety related components of the battery management system, particularly the sensor technology, are, therefore, redundant.
Battery management system , current, voltage and temperature sensors, and a contactor circuit. The cell supervisory circuits monitor the battery cells in terms of their voltage and temperature.
Conducting of current The contactor current allows the vehicle electrical system battery of the electric drivetrain to be electrically isolated. If an accident is detected or another potential hazardous state is identified, a control logic opens the contactor that is located at each positive or negative battery terminal. To prevent a safety critical condition, this logic can open the contactor even if the battery system is overloaded. The terminals of the battery system are thus de energized.
The battery is connected to the vehicle electrical system of the electric drivetrain with its buffer capacitor via a charging contactor and a pre charging resistor. This prevents an excessively large initial charge current when the buffer capacitor is discharged. During normal operation, the battery is connected to the vehicle electrical system with low impedance via the main contactor.
Balancing Due to manufacturing tolerances and side reactions that depend on cell parameters and the cell temperature, the individual cells eventually have a different state of charge. This is problematic insofar as the cell with the lowest state of charge sets the discharge limit, and the cell with the highest state of charge sets the charge limit. For this reason, the state of charge of a battery's cells has to be balanced from time to time. This is done by a balancing circuit, which is usually integrated in the cell supervisory circuits. In automotive applications, balancing is typically a passive process; that is, it occurs by discharging individual cells via a resistor connected in parallel.
Thermal management To ensure safe and reliable operation of the battery even when the load is fluctuating and to maximize the service life of the cells, the temperature of the cells should be kept in a range typically from 20 degC to 40 degC. The service life of the cells is largely
reduced as the temperature increases, : because many aging processes are temperature dependent. This is particularly relevant for use in hot climate zones. At low temperatures, the capacity of the cells noticeably decreases.
In vehicles, there are various systems used to control the temperature of cells. Liquid cooling Liquid cooling Liquid cooling systems are usually used in systems with high requirements for regulating temperature. The battery is equipped with a separate cooling circuit, in which circulates a special coolant, such as a water glycol mixture. The coolant temperature is controlled by a heat exchanger, which is connected to the vehicle's air conditioning system. Frequently a heater element is also integrated, so that the battery can be heated at low temperatures.
It is connected to the cells via cooling plates. Temperature sensors monitor the temperature of the cells. The central thermal management system, often integrated in the battery management system, controls the flow rate and coolant temperature depending on the situation and temperature.
Batteries with a liquid cooling system can be built very compactly, but require additional effort due to the cooling plates, the piping and the connection to the vehicle's air conditioning system.
Refrigerant cooling Refrigerant cooling An alternative to a liquid cooling system is the refrigerant cooling system, in which the cooling components of the battery are designed as evaporators and directly integrated into the refrigerant circuit of the vehicle's air conditioning system. Systems of this kind have been used only rarely to date.
Air cooling Air cooling Air cooled systems are the most cost effective designs. However, they require more space due to the need for space between the cells. Moreover, the air interfaces mean that hermetically sealed battery cases are not possible, or they can be implemented only with great effort.
Air cooled systems are often used for batteries with lower cooling requirements, for example, in systems with lower specific power requirements and for use in moderate climate zones.
In air cooled systems, fans controlled by a thermal management system take in air that is usually precooled. This is blown through the battery system; the fan speed can be controlled depending on the cell temperature determined by the temperature sensors.
Charging method for : lithium ion batteries Lithium ion batteries are generally charged according to the IU method, i.e., with constant current up to a specified voltage, then further with constant voltage at a specified maximum current. The battery can be charged relatively quickly with very good efficiency up to a state of charge of around 80 %; this is exploited by fastcharging methods. The limit values for current and voltage are specified by the cell manufacturer and vary depending on the electrochemical system used. Adherence to these limit values is monitored by the battery management system because exceeding these limit values may give rise to safety critical states.
Recycling of lithium ion vehicle batteries Lithium ion vehicle batteries consist of a large number of cells and of housing and electrical and electronic components, and have significant economic value. To utilize these batteries to their full potential, scientists and engineers are currently examining the possibilities of their stationary use after automotive use. This is referred to as "second life". Applications may include for example the storage of solar power.
The batteries are subjected to a recycling process when they reach the end of their service life. For this purpose the batteries must be fully discharged for safety reasons and then mechanically disassembled to the cell level. The housing and the electrical and electronic components are processed further in accordance with triedand tested methods. The cells are further disassembled mechanically and later the substances of content are recovered by means of hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes. The aim is recover the substances of content of such quality as to permit their use in electrochemical cells. Processes are currently being tested to assess their economic viability.
Application: Supercapacitors are classed among the rechargeable electric storage cells such as, for example, electrolytic capacitors and lithium ion cells. In capacitors, electrical energy is stored in an electric field; in a battery, energy is stored through the process of an electrochemical reaction. To achieve a voltage that can be utilized for vehicles , it is necessary to connect in series both supercapacitors and electrochemical storage cells since the individual cell voltages are restricted by the stability of the electrolytes and electrode materials used. The required energy for the electric storage devices is, taking account of the finally required voltage, then set by the capacitance of the individual cells and the number of cells connected in parallel.
Qmax SME0709D Stored charge max max 0 Cell voltage Stored charge max max min 0 Cell voltage Stored charge max max min 0 Cell voltage
Electric double layer : capacitors Storage principle In supercapacitors of this type, energy is stored in the electric field of the electrochemical double layers of the negative and the positive electrodes. This creates opposing charges of different polarities in the area of a solid/liquid interface. There is surface enrichment and enrichment of electrons on the solid side, while positively and negatively charged ions are accumulated on the liquid electrolyte side. There is no electrochemical reaction involved. Electrode materials Large surface area carbon materials , with or without the use of solvents, may be used to coat the collector film. The positive and negative electrodes can be made of the same materials.
Properties Different working voltage ranges may result, depending on which electrode materials are used and whether aqueous or non aqueous electrolytes are used. Thus, the maximum cell voltage for non aqueous electrolytes can be up to 3 V ; for aqueous electrolytes roughly only half of this value is achieved. The significantly better conductivity of aqueous electrolyte is beneficial for the internal resistance and the specific power of the component.
The use of new electrode and electrolyte components as well as additives offers optimization potential for increasing energy densities . The aim here is in particular to extend the utilizable voltage window and to reduce the internal resistance. However, scientists and engineers are working on increasing effective surface areas, which includes pore geometries adapted to ion radii.
Like lithium ion cells, large capacity supercapacitors are also available in the cylindrical, "pouch", and prismatic formats . The inner cell structure can also take the form of a coil or stack here.
SME010 1E Negative electrode Electrolyte resistance Positive electrode c a b Negative electrode Positive electrode Electrolyte Activated carbon Activated carbon Electric potential Positive electrode Negative electrode Electrolyte DSB DSB
With regard to their electrical management in the system network, it is often sufficient to monitor only the voltages and temperatures. In addition, passive balancing methods based on parallel connected voltage dividers are often sufficient to achieve equal voltages in a series connection.
Areas of application In fully and partially electrified drivetrains, supercapacitors can assume the role of a reversible, electric storage device with high power output, for example for efficient energy storage during recuperation and to provide assistance when accelerating. Power, energy content, and voltage must be configured in accordance with the load requirements and the power electronics peripherals. Double layer capacitors can also be used in vehicles to power electric actuators and starters. Current applications for road vehicles are centered on the 12 V to 48 V range.
Hybrid supercapacitors The term hybrid in the context of electric storage devices refers to an electrical linking of different storage technologies. This linking can be achieved by an electrical connection at the cell level or pack level, but also inside a storage cell, whereby storage materials of different technologies are combined.
A significant increase in the specific energies . The hybridization of energy storage can be realized in the area of just one or also both storage cell electrodes. Finally, the capacitances of the storage processes active at the capacitor's respective voltage operating point are added up. An exhaustive discharge down to 0 V is for the most part not possible with this type of supercapacitor. ________________________________ References References  P. Kurzweil, O. K. Dietlmeier: Elektrochemische Speicher, 2nd Ed., Verlag Springer Vieweg, 2018.
Functions: Architecture Digital technology with programmable controllers has revolutionized automotive engineering. A whole range of functions can be realized with this technology. Many influencing factors are taken into account in the control of the systems in the vehicle. The ECU . A microcontroller runs the program. The ECU components are called "hardware".
Examples of ECUs Engine management, for example, performs the entire openand closed loop control of the engine . Without these possibilities it would not be possible to adhere to current emission limits and low consumption figures under high engine performance conditions.
in the ECU UMK1508 5E digital Input signals: Power supply Actuators analog Communication interfaces Diagnostics interface EEPROM Signal conditioning Microcontroller Output stages ECU Monitoring module A/D converter CAN RAM Flash EPROM
Compared with the ECU for driving dy : namics control for example the range of functions and the derived performance e.g. with regard to a door control unit, which controls the power window drives, are low. Accordingly, less powerful components are used in the ECU for this purpose. Electric and hybrid drives, which are increasingly penetrating the market, also have a large range of functions and thus impose high demands on the performance capability of openand closedloop control.
Operating principle All ECUs operate according to the same principle. The ECU detects signals from sensors and control elements, evaluates them, and activates actuators so that they can exchange information with each other. An ECU network is thereby established. For example, the driving speed, which is required as the input signal in many ECUs, is only calculated in one ECU from the signals from the wheel speed sensors and forwarded via the data bus to the other ECUs.
Future Because of the performance capability of the electronic components in the ECU, systems can be combined in a single ECU. There are thus already systems in which engine management and transmission control are combined in one ECU. The trend is towards "vehicle computers"  with high computing capacities and much more storage capacity which supplement the previous microcontroller based ECUs. As a result, functions from conventional ECUs can be transferred to centralized "vehicle computers". Requirements Operating conditions High demands are made of ECUs. They are exposed to different and sometimes also extreme loads, depending on their installation location. Thus, for example, an engine ECU installed in the engine compartment or directly on the engine is subject to influences that are quite different from the door control unit installed in the passenger compartment. Irrespective of this, all ECUs must meet high requirements with regard to functionality, quality, and service life.
Range of functions and : data processing speed The performance of the electronic components used in an ECU is increasing continuously and facilitates ever more complex control algorithms. This applies particularly to the engine management system, which must take ever more stringent emission limits into consideration. In response to new requirements the range of functions and thus the demand for memory capacity are increasing continuously, while the trend is toward ever decreasing external device dimensions. Development is therefore heading towards greater functional integration and to miniaturization of both electronic and mechanical components such as plug in connections.
The increasing range of functions is accompanied by an increase in data processing speed. Functions must be executed within a specified time frame. Many program sections must be reliably executed with a predefined time period so that the processes in the ECU keep pace with the physical processes .
Development of complexity Development of complexity The last few years have witnessed the use of ever more powerful microcontrollers with increasing computing speed and greater memory resources. At the beginning of the 1990s 32 kByte for the program memory, 8 kByte for the data memory and 12 MHz clock frequency were sufficient for an engine management system. Microcontrollers currently used have program and data memories several MByte in size and several computer cores with several 100 MHz clock frequency.
assumed that the structure widths of the microcontrollers used in current engine control units will for around two to four generations  structure widths of 7 nm are state of the art in the microprocessor field and 28 nm for engine control units in the microcontroller field.
MDG1 Word length, bit 16 Flash memory, MByte 0.3 Connector contacts Clock frequency, MHz 112...134 20 32 1.5...4  112...154 40 32 1.5...6  94...222 80...150 32 1.5...8  94...315 80...300 1.5...8  94...315 80...260 2...8  80...180 56...66 min.
ECU components : The ECU is the control device of an electronic system. It detects the operating conditions via sensors, processes them and activates actuators. Signal processing takes place in the ECU's computer core.
Computer core Microprocessor Microprocessor The microprocessor . A very large amount of special commands which are executed in a specific number of clock pulses is implemented in these processors.
RISC processors are usually used in ECUs, i.e., also in vehicle ECUs. The advantage of RISC processors lies in the fact that the commands usually only require one clock pulse and can be implemented by the simpler and faster commands of higher performance systems.
An important variable for comparing the computing capacity of a computer architecture is the DMIPS specification .
DMIPS is a very good specification for applications which require a very high bandwidth . A microprocessor cannot usefully operate by itself; it always acts as part of a microcomputer.
forms arithmetic and logic operations and operations involving digital signal processing, while the controller retrieves the commands and data from the memory. Pipeline stages, which preprocess the commands , are used to achieve higher clock frequencies. The arithmetic logic unit is integrated in the pipeline.
The program memory . The data are still available after switching on again even when there is no supply voltage. In current applications the program memory is usually a flash EPROM.
The data being run at any given time are stored in the data memory. These data change, and are stored in a RAM .
A cache as a high speed buffer memory for program and data memories and the relatively slow access to the memories would drastically reduce CPU speed and there would be no use in deploying a high speed processor. The bus system links the individual elements in a microcomputer. A clock generator makes sure that all the operations
Logic circuits are chips that carry out special tasks, such as for interrupts .
Input and outputs units .
Microcontroller unit can be supported.
CPU Central Processing Unit, ALU Arithmetic Logic Unit, DSP Digital Signal Processor, RAM Random Access Memory, EEPROM Electrically Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory, ADC Analog Digital Converter, DAC Digital Analog Converter. SAE0881 3E Data storage Data manipulation Data exchange Data event check Memory Data and program memory Bus Central processing unit Bus Bus Bus Bus Input and output units, ADC, DAC, timers, serial interfaces Interrupt system Flash RAM ALU DSP EEPROM
Interrupt controller The interrupt controller signals to a computer core that, due to a time critical event in the peripherals or in a different core, the processing of the current task may have to be interrupted.
Hardware accelerator This is a module in which certain computing functions are implemented in hardware and not calculated by the computer core. The e function and the MAC unit  are an example of this. MAC is a computing operation for the efficient calculation of mathematical expressions two values are multiplied and added to the previous multiplications. This makes it possible today for example to process Gaussian functions by more than a factor of 50 faster than in a computer core based on functions programmed in a programming language. These accelerators will be necessary in future MCUs because a clock frequency increase to provide this necessary computing capacity is neither technically possible nor commercially sensible.
GPIO "General Purpose Input Output" switch inputs and switch outputs are read in and read out within 10 to 20 ms. Consequently this means no real time capability.
racy: The SH converter stores the input voltage in a capacitor and then converts it with different processes into a digital value.
values with a high resolution: In the case of an SD converter  only the delta for the previous measurement in output positively or negatively with a preset clearance as bit 0 or 1 for further processing in the module internally.
GTM and then process the capture values.
The compare function for output signals generates an event at the output pin at a specific time or angle. These values are stored beforehand in registers.
Microcontrollers Microcontrollers Microcomputers which have real time capability are called microcontrollers. Nowadays they are typically integrated on a chip and are not, as in the past, designed as discrete components on the printed circuit board. This is possible due to the fact that highly complex systems can be integrated on a chip thanks to modern technologies.
For future applications it will no longer be sufficient to have just one CPU, since the clock frequency cannot be increased in any way the user likes and this also results in very high current inputs. For this reason, microcontrollers will come in variants containing more than one CPU. For series 2023 Bosch offers a system with 35 computer cores 10 main cores, 12 digital signal processor cores, 10 cores in the timer, two cores in the peripherals, and one core in the security module.
longer availability: Whereas no new microcontrollers have to be subsequently delivered for cellular phones and PCs after a production cycle of 1 3 years, complex projects in the automotive field start series production only after 3 5 years development, after which they remain in series production for a period of 15 years and are then subsequently delivered for a further 15 years.
Types of microprocessor unit Types of microprocessor unit There is no clear definition which determines whether a component is termed an MPU or an MCU on the basis of its properties. A sensible technical distinction is to make a distinction based on the type of application.
MPU Such a computer core is optimized for the support of non real time functions like virtual memory management and the use of other virtualization mechanisms like Hypervisor to support operating systems like Adaptive Autosar or Linux. With such MPUs interfaces such as PCI are very often supported. The architecture is optimized for bandwidth in this way plannable tasks can be processed at very high speed.
MPU with fast reaction to events as for MCU). Because this architecture is optimized for short latencies, very large memories close to the core are required, and not externally as for the MPU.
Semiconductor memories: Memory principle Memory principle Data storage comprises the following operations: recording . In semiconductor memories the states produced are either "more conductive" and "less conductive" or "charged" and "discharged". A technology in frequent use today is the flash memory. Memories operating according to this principle are electrically programmable and erasable.
New memory types will also be used in the future. The FRAM .
Programmable on a programming unit Programmable in the circuit Semiconductor memories Non volatile memories Volatile memories Manufacturerprogrammed Userprogrammed Static memories Dynamic memories Not erasable UVerasable ROM read only memory PROM programmable read only memory EPROM erasable PROM Flash EEPROM EEPROM electrical EPROM SRAM static RAM DRAM dynamic RAM DRAM dynamic RAM Electrically erasable UAE0465 3E
reprogramming, in this case additional bits are stored in the memory matrix and erroneous bits are corrected with the information from these bits customary here are two bit error detection and single bit error correction for 64 bit memory areas via additional bits to correct the erroneous bits.
Only static memories , SRAMs do not lose charge and do not have to be refreshed during operation in the ms time range. SRAMs keep their charge as long as the storage cell is connected to the supply voltage.
Program and Program and data memory data memory The microcontroller requires a program the software for the calculations. It is stored in a non volatile program memory. The CPU reads out the values, interprets them as commands, and executes these commands in order.
Variant specific data  with these data.
Flash memory The flash EPROM has superseded the conventional EPROM erasable with UV light as the program memory. It is electrically erasable so that the ECU can be reprogrammed in the service workshop without it having to be opened. The ECU is connected via a serial interface to the reprogramming station.
RAM All the variable data calculated in the software are stored in the RAM . Modern 40 nm microcontrollers contain up to eight MByte RAM therefore there is no need for an external memory module. Newer technologies will additionally feature a HyperRAM interface to make an external RAM available for the application.
The RAM loses the entire data stock when the ECU is disconnected from the supply voltage; it is therefore a volatile memory. Parts of the RAM can be permanently supplied with voltage to prevent adaptation values learned during vehicle operation from being lost when the ignition is switched off. These values are however lost when the battery is disconnected. Therefore this option is only very rarely used today and the adaptation values are written to the non volatile EEPROM.
EEPROM Data that change in vehicle operation and which must not be lost when the battery is disconnected .
It is also possible to use separately erasable areas of the flash EPROM as a non volatile data memory for these data. An EEPROM is emulated in the flash for this purpose. The current data in each case are written to the end of a table, which gradually fills the blocks of the flash area. The old data can then be completely erased with the block. This ensures that the correct data are in the memory even when the supply voltage is disconnected.
Monitoring module: A monitoring module is required for safety relevant systems. This is effected by a logic circuit in the voltage regulator . The monitoring module can also be effected by a separate computer.
The microcontroller and the monitoring module use a "question and answer game" to monitor each other. When a fault is detected, the ECU of both is rendered safe independently of each other in the case of engine management for example by the deactivation of torque relevant output stages . Voltage regulator The electronic components in the ECU need a stable voltage of 5 V. Some applications also require further voltage values, e.g., 3.3 V. The voltage regulator maintains the battery voltage, which can be 6 to 16 V depending on the battery state and load, at these constant values. Suppressor circuits suppress high interference voltages from the vehicle electrical system.
The voltage regulator contains an enabling logic which ensures that the voltages run up under defined conditions and then enable resets. This ensures that the microcontroller runs up under defined conditions after the supply voltage is switched on.
ASIC chips ASIC chips are application specific integrated circuits. They are designed and produced in accordance with the specification of ECU development. Integrating a large number of functions in an IC reduces the space requirement, reduces manufacturing costs and increases operational reliability.
Thus, for example, the power supply for the ECU and several power output stages with the associated diagnostic circuits can be integrated on one chip. An example of this is the "U chip", which features on one IC a power supply, the monitoring module, serial interface drivers and output stages, and an H bridge with diagnostics.
Another function of an ASIC module is, for example, to relieve the load on the microcontroller or to make additional hardware available .
An ASIC can be used in the gasoline engine management system for knock control which boosts the signals supplied by the knock sensors, filters them via a bandpass, rectifies them, and integrates them via a specified crank angle window. The microcontroller then only has to read out the integrated voltage value at the end of the window. However, in newer ECU generations the knock sensor signals are detected directly by the microcontroller via high speed analog digital converters .
Special ASICs are also used to operate, evaluate and diagnose l sensors. They activate the sensors with defined signals, evaluate currents, voltages and temperature with great precision, and convert these signals for the microcontroller into digital input signals.
ASICs are also used to activate fuel injectors for high pressure fuel injection. A defined current curve can thus be set. For special applications ASICs with several output stages and H bridges are available which also contain a diagnosis function and can be activated via a serial bus. Communication ECU internal communication with the ASICs is effected via SPI .
Data which do not require a high bit rate  are also serially transferred over only one data line.
In this way, the ECUs can also send data for calculations to other ECUs if they are connected to these via a multitude of communication buses.
FD and CAN_XL): for some devices up to 20 CAN buses to one ECU data transfer currently at 1 MBaud, in future up to 15 MBaud.
In the case of tuning often the weakest link of a chain is attacked if the engine control unit is more difficulty to tune, the modification of input signals is used to achieve higher engine power. 30 years ago the crankshaft signal connector was connected with a 180 deg offset to achieve a more retarded ignition with regard to TDC according to the table stored in the microcontroller e.g., 10 % more with the same input data.
Sensors and actuators form as the peripherals the interface between the vehicle and the ECU as processing unit. In addition, there are bidirectional communication data buses , via which information is exchanged with other ECUs or sensors .
Input signals Control elements and sensors form an interface between the vehicle and the ECU. The electrical signals are supplied to the ECU via the wiring harness and connectors. Sensors can have analog or digital interfaces.
Digital interface Digital interface Digital input signals have just two states "High" .
Sensor signals via communication Sensor signals via communication interface interface In future sensors which detect analog quantities will increasingly incorporate additional electronics which digitize the analog voltage locally and output the measured value via a standardized digital interface . They enable sensors from different manufacturers to be connected to ECUs.
Signal conditioning Adapter circuits Adapter circuits Each sensor has a specific input. The input signals are limited by suppressor circuits to permissible voltage levels. Filters remove most of the superimposed noise from the useful signals and limit the bandwidth .
Signal conditioning with ASICs: Signal conditioning with ASICs For some sensors, e.g., l sensors, special modules is achieved with a single ASIC.
Bosch or input for switching type l sensors. Furthermore, switchable current sources can be configured as pull up or pull down for each input.
SAE1380 1E Resistance measurement ADC Digital inputs Voltage measurement Supply SENT 1...4 Analog/digital outputs Inductiveor Hall sensor evaluation Crossbar distributor Wiring harness Pull up/pull down configuration Analog/digital 1...12 Digital 1...3 Interface Microcontroller Analog digital converter Low pass filter Amplifier Signal multiplexer Signal processor and RAM Serial interface Internal signals Signal switch Delta sigma converter RAM SP SPI to microcontroller l sensor
Signal processing: The ECU is the control center for the functional sequences of an electronic system. The control algorithms run in the microcontroller. The input signals provided by the sensors and the interfaces to other systems for example via the CAN bus serve as input variables. They are checked for plausibility again in the microcontroller. The algorithms are processed with the aid of the ECU program . The software calculates the output signals to activate the actuators.
Output signals Output signals Different actuators are activated by the ECU via appropriate output stages on the basis of the data processed in the microcontroller. These actuators differ in their power demand and in how they are activated.
The output stage modules in the ECU have a number of individually activated output stages which supply sufficient power to activate the actuators.
Signal types Signal types Switching signals Switching signals are used to switch actuators on and off, depending on the current operating point are switched via relays or with output stages directly on the assembly.
PWM signals Digital output signals can be output as a PWM signal  with constant frequency and variable ontime. Actuators such as the exhaust gas recirculation valve, the throttle valve or the charge pressure actuator can, depending on this variable on time, be moved into specified operating positions.
Application specific output stages Application specific output stages Application specific output stages are then used if special current and voltage curves for activating the actuators are needed which cannot be realized with standard output stages.
An example of such is the activation of high pressure fuel injectors for gasoline direct injection . Consequently, it is no longer necessary to have all the inputs and outputs permanently defined already at the start of ECU development. Adaptation to the concrete application can be performed later by means of a software or data record modification.
Switching variants: Switching variants There are different switching variants for activating the actuators. Low side output stages control inductive and ohmic loads which are connected to the battery voltage . Self protection function Self protection function The output stages are protected against short circuits to ground, against short circuits to battery voltage, and against being destroyed due to electrical or thermal overload. These malfunctions and interrupted lines are detected as faults by the output stage IC and signaled to the microcontroller via a serial interface.
Communication interfaces The ECU has one or more communication interfaces for communicating with other electronic systems. In this way, for example, the driving speed can be sent by driving dynamics control to all the systems that need this signal .
Assembly and connection : technology Circuit board technology Engine control units are typically manufactured in accordance with circuit board technology using circuit board materials with four to eight layers. The housing consists for example of a base/ cover combination of diecast aluminum and deep drawn aluminum sheet which are screwed or bonded to each other. A membrane impervious to water is used for pressure equalization. As a result, an atmospheric pressure sensor can be installed in the ECU which for engine management purposes enables the injected fuel quantity also to be corrected on an air pressure dependent, i.e., altitude dependent, basis.
Hybrid control units In special cases, especially where there are extreme temperature requirements, thick film hybrid circuit boards are used. This technology involves the application of both integrated and discrete components on ceramic substrates.
Plug in connections A customary plug in connection for example for engine management in passenger car applications has around 200 contacts, split into a number of compartments. In commercial vehicle applications a number of connectors are also placed next to each other on the cover, making possible many more contacts .
diesel engine control systems a) Passenger car ECU for body mounting  .
The left side of Figure 11 depicts the cooling of an IC . Feedthroughs, which direct the heat to the underside of the printed circuit board, pass through the printed circuit board. The housing base is raised at this point so that the distance to the printed circuit board is so small that it can be bridged with heat transfer compound.
The far right side of Figure 11 depicts the converse path. A component dissipates its heat via the cooling surface resting on it .
Active heat transfer means that cooling ducts through which a cooling medium  flows are integrated in the ECU housing. Aside from the physical properties of the cooling medium, the magnitude of the heat flow is dependent on the coolant temperature, the flow rate, and the duct length.
1 Ambient temperature, 2 Printed circuit board, 3 Power IC, 4 Slug down , 8 Heat transfer medium, 9 Feedthrough, in the p.c.b. under slug down components for improved heat conduction  through the p.c.b., 10 Cooling bank, 11 Housing base, 12 Fuel duct for cooling the ECU. SAE1385 1Y 2 8 9 10 11 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 1
Software: To be able to support different electric and electronic architectures that are in a state of transition, it is necessary to isolate the application software from the hardware as far as possible. The solution comes in the form of standardized basic software  and standard interfaces for all the electronic vehicle functions. Generally, the basic software is defined as the hardware dependent software, i.e., software components for example for microcontroller peripherals, drivers for application interfaces, diagnostics, communication, operating system, and system control.
Using the worldwide AUTOSAR standard , the so called application data. The entire program is stored in the read only memory, designed in ECUs as a flash memory. To satisfy the different requirements for controlling for example a driving engine and the statutory provisions for exhaust gas emissions and diagnostics, it is essential to change and optimize the application data.
SAE1386 2E Function monitoring Program flow checking LockstepCore LC Driver function Memory test level 2, 3 Hardware memory test Input signals Output stages Release Release Error pin Release Level 1 HW uC Level 2 Level 3 Inquiry LC LC LC CAN Flex Ray PFC link Check hardware configuration Check of additional hardware modules Monitoring modules
Functional safety: As the complexity of electronic components in vehicles constantly increases, so too does the potential for malfunctions. If a safety relevant component is affected by such a malfunction, people may come to harm in the worst cases . The engine control unit uses hardware and software functions to monitor itself continuously for malfunctions. Three software levels and a hardware based monitoring module are implemented for this purpose .
On the hardware level the ECU has a monitoring module. Microcontroller and monitoring module monitor each other by way of a "question and answer game" . If a fault is detected, both can initiate appropriate substitute functions independently of one another.
The effectiveness of the switch off paths of levels 2 and 3 and of the monitoring module is checked each time the ECU is switched on.
EOL programming The large number of vehicle variants with different control programs and data records calls for a procedure for reducing the ECU types required by the vehicle manufacturer. To this end the complete memory area of the flash EPROM can be programmed with the ECU program and the variant specific data record at the end of vehicle production with EOL programming . Data transfer is effected via the communication interface. Alternatively, to reduce the variant diversity in the memory, it is possible to store several data variants which are then selected by means of coding at the end of line. This coding is stored in the EEPROM. ________________________________ References References ISO 16750: Road vehicles Environmental conditions and testing for electrical and electronic equipment.
Mechatronic systems and : components Definition The term "mechatronics" is a compound derived from the words mechanisms and electronics, where electronics means "hardware" and "software", and mechanisms is the generic term for the disciplines of "mechanical engineering" and "hydraulics". It is not a question of replacing mechanical engineering by "electronification", but of developing a synergistic approach and design methodology . The aim is to achieve a synergistic optimization of mechanical engineering, electronic hardware and software in order to project more functions at low cost, less weight and installation space, and better quality. A crucial factor governing the success of a mechatronic approach to solving problems is to regard the two previously separate disciplines as a single entity.
Information technology Software Mechatronics Electrical engineering Electronics Process computing Open loop control engineering Closed loop control engineering Actuator technology Sensor technology Electromechanics Drive engineering Mechanics Hydraulics Simulation Modeling CAD SAE1273 1E
in existence for quite some time is "drive : by wire", i. e. electronic throttle control. "Brake by wire" is replacing the mechanical and hydraulic link between the brake pedal and the wheel brake. Sensors detect the driver's brake command and transmit this information to an electronic control unit. The unit then generates the required braking effect at the wheels by means of actuators.
A possible option for implementing "brake by wire" is the electrohydraulic braking system . When the brake is operated or in the event of stabilization interventions by driving dynamics control, the SBC ECU calculates the desired setpoint brake pressures at the individual wheels. Since the unit calculates the required braking pressures separately for each wheel and detects the actual values separately, it can also regulate the braking pressure to each wheel via the wheel pressure modulators. The four pressure modulators each consist of an inlet and an outlet valve controlled by electronic output stages which together produce a finely metered pressure regulation. In the common rail system, pressure generation and fuel injection are separated from each other. A high pressure accumulator, i. e. the common rail, stores constantly the fuel pressure required for each of the engine's operating states. A solenoid valve controlled injector with integrated nozzle assumes the function of injecting the fuel directly into the combustion chamber of each cylinder. The engine electronics constantly request data on accelerator pedal position, rotational speed, operating temperature, fresh air intake flow, and rail pressure in order to optimize the control of fuel metering as a function of the operating conditions.
Examples at component level Fuel injectors are crucial components in determining future potential of diesel engine technology. Common rail injectors are an excellent example of the fact that an extremely high degree of functionality and, ultimately, customer utility can only be achieved by controlling all the physical domains to which these components are subjected.
In vehicle CD drives are exposed to particularly tough conditions. Besides wide temperature ranges, they must withstand extreme vibrations that have a critical impact on such precision engineered systems. The drives are usually equipped with a spring damper system to isolate the playback unit from vibrations that occur when the vehicle is moving. Any considerations to reduce the weight and installation space of CD drives immediately raise questions concerning these springdamper systems. If the damper system is eliminated from a CD drive, the main focus is on designing a mechanical system with zero clearances and producing additional reinforcement for the focus and tracking controllers at high frequencies. Only by considering both measures from a mechatronic viewpoint is it possible to achieve an optimized vibration proof solution for an automotive environment. Besides weight savings of about 15 %, the installation height has also been reduced by about 20 %.
The new mechatronic approach for electrically driven coolant motors is based on brushless, electronically commutated DC motors. Initially, they are more expensive than previous motors equipped with brushes. However, the overall optimization approach has a positive tradeoff: Brushless DC motors can be used as "wet rotors" with a much simpler design. This reduces the number of single parts by roughly 60 %. Taking the aggregate view, the sturdier design has double the service life, almost half the weight, about 40 % less the overall length, while maintaining costs at a comparable level.
Examples in the field of micromechanics Another area of applications for mechatronics is the field of micromechanical sensors, with noteworthy examples such as hot film air mass meters and yaw rate sensors.
The design of microsystems also requires an interdisciplinary approach owing to the close interaction between the subsystems involving individual disciplines such as mechanical engineering, electrostatics, fluid dynamics , and electronics.
Development methodology: Simulation The special challenges that designers face when developing mechatronic systems are the ever shorter development times and the increasing complexity of the systems. At the same time it is vital to ensure that the developments will result in useful products.
Complex mechatronic systems consist of a large number of components from a wide range of physical domains: hydraulics, mechanical engineering, and electronics. The interaction between these domains is a decisive factor governing the function and performance of the overall system. Simulation models are required to review key design decisions, especially in the early development stages when there is no prototype available.
Basic issues can often be clarified by producing relatively simple models of the components. If more detail is required, more refined component models are needed. The detailed models focus mainly on a specific physical domain.
As a result, there are detailed hydraulic models of common rail injectors. They are simulated using special programs whose algorithms are matched precisely to the hydraulic systems. For example, the requirements here would be to take cavitation phenomena into consideration.
Detailed models are also needed to  design the power electronics for activating the injectors. Again, this involves the use of simulation tools which must be developed specifically to design electronic circuits.
Tools that are specially designed for this specific part of the overall system are also required to develop and simulate the control unit software which controls the highpressure pump and power electronics using signals from the sensors.
Comb structures Detection electrodes Rigid bodies Elastic bodies Bending beam Circle segment Divided stator comb Undivided stator comb From circle segments From circle segments From square segments From square segments Electromechanical components Mechanical components Microsystem UAE0942E
The application of various domain specific simulation tools during the design of mechatronic systems is only efficient if there is some sort of support for exchanging models and parameters between the simulation tools. The direct exchange of models is highly problematic due to the specific languages used for describing the models of each of the tools.
Development process Requirements analysis Validation Validation Validation Test Test Test Product Component manufacture Model Test cases Customer requirement System design Model, prototype Test cases System performance specifications System specifications Component design, development Acceptance test System test Component test Models, prototypes Test cases Component performance specifications Component specifications Function System Components
A requirements specification .
Recursions at each of the design levels shorten the development stages significantly. Simulations, rapid prototyping, and simultaneous engineering are tools that allow rapid verification, and they create the conditions for shortening product cycles.
Outlook: The driving force behind mechatronics is the continuous progress in microelectronics. Mechatronics benefits from computer technology in the form of ever more powerful integrated computers in standard applications. Accordingly, there is a huge potential for further increases in safety and comfort in motor vehicles, accompanied by further reductions in pollutant emissions and fuel consumption. On the other hand, engineers face new challenges in mastering the new technologies for these systems.
Even in the event of a fault, future "X bywire" systems must continue to be capable of fulfilling a prescribed functionality without reverting to a mechanical or hydraulic fallback level. The condition for their implementation is a high reliability and highavailability mechatronic architecture which requires a "simple" proof of safety. This affects both single components as well as energy and signal transmissions.
Besides "x by wire" systems, driver assistance systems and their related manmachine interfaces are another field in which significant progress can be achieved for users and automotive manufacturers by the systematic implementation of mechatronic systems.
tion, with the objective of overall optimization, through to finite element simulation to achieve a detailed understanding, and "bottom up" design engineering from component testing through to system testing.
Another challenge is training in order to further an interdisciplinary mindset and develop suitable DE processes and forms of organization and communication.
Motivation: Aim of development Any development has the aim of creating a new function or improving an existing function of the vehicle. Such functions bring about an added value for the user of the vehicle .
Software requirements The specific requirements of the software are highly varied. Many systems for the engine and for driving safety must operate with "real time capability", i. e. the response of the control operation must keep pace with the physical process. When very fast physical processes are being controlled, such as for example engine management or driving dynamics control, the calculation must therefore be made very quickly. Even the requirements with regard to reliability are high in many fields. This is particularly true of safety relevant functions. The software and the electronics are monitored by complex diagnostics.
The software is used across the many variants of a vehicle or even across model series. It must then be adaptable to the corresponding destination system. It contains calibration parameters and program maps for this purpose. These amount to several 10,000 per vehicle. These manipulated variables are dependent on each other in many ways. In addition, a functionality is distributed beyond multiple  systems or control units more and more frequently.
The software is for the most part developed specially for the corresponding  applications and is integrated into the  entire system. It is called "embedded  software". The many functions are often  developed and further developed over a long period of time in many locations around the world. Because spare parts must remain available even after the production of a particular vehicle has come to an end, the electronics in the vehicle must have a relatively long life cycle of up to 30 years.
For cost reasons, ECUs often contain microcontrollers with limited computing power and limited memory space. This  requires optimization measures in software development to reduce the hardware resources required.
The characteristic features of software differ depending on the field of application. While the software for the drivetrain is  extensive, the emphasis is on real time performance in the chassis applications. In safety and comfort and convenience applications, the emphasis is on efficiency, i. e. the consumption of resources, and in multimedia applications large volumes of data must be processed in a short period of time.
The complexity resulting from these requirements and features must be economically mastered in a cooperation of development between vehicle manufacturers and suppliers.
Design of software : in motor vehicles The software in a motor vehicle is made up of many components. A distinction is essentially made, as is the case with a PC, between the "perceptible functions" of the software, the application software and platform software partly dependent on the hardware . The interaction between all the functions is defined in the architecture. Different views can be adopted here. The static view describes hierarchically the function groups, the signals and the distribution of the resources. On the other hand, the functional view describes the signal progression through the different functions. The dynamic, i. e. timedependent view, considers the time  response in the execution of the various tasks. Standards have already been introduced at an early stage to ensure the interaction between and further development of the individual components. The most important standards are explained in the following.
Important standards for software in motor vehicles Bodies/committees The "Association for Standardization of Automation and Measuring Systems"  supports different data transport protocols for this purpose. By using ASAM MCD2 specifications, the binary data in the ECU can be addressed and the relevant quantities can at the same time be displayed in connected tools as physical values and processed. The standard ASAM MCD3 also permits an automation of such processes, for example for the automatic calibration of data records. Further ASAM standards cover, for example, the exchange of functional descriptions and data.
for microcontrollers and standardized software components Interaction layer OSEK COM Network layer ISO ISO diagnostics protocol Flash loader Hardware Abstraction Layer Application software Platform software...
Bus driver Function f3 Hardware interface Function f1 Function f2 Network management OSEK NM Vehicle bus Sensors, actuators UAE0958 1E
The FlexRay Consortium developed the : specification for the FlexRay field bus for open and closed loop control in the automobile field. Thanks to high transfer rates with predefined bus arbitration and a fault tolerant design it is particularly suitable for use in active safety systems and in the drivetrain .
The International Electrotechnical Commission is an international standardization body in the fields of electrical engineering and electronics .
The Motor Industry Software Reliability Association is an organization in the automotive industry that devises rules for the reliable development and appli cation of software in vehicle systems . The most widely known is the programming standard MISRA C, which was developed by the MISRA. It prescribes programming rules for reliable programming in the programming language C. The purpose of this standard is to avoid runtime errors due to unreliable C constructs and structural weaknesses due to misunderstandings between programmers, and to safeguard the validity of expressions. Many rules can be automatically checked and taken into account in the generation of codes.
The Society of Automotive Engineers  is an international science and technology organization operating in the field of mobility technology . It sets among other things standards for the  automotive industry and promotes the  exchange of knowledge and ideas.
The Japan Automotive Software Platform and Architecture is an initiative for reducing costs and developing technology in automotive electronics. It encourages Japanese companies to develop jointly non competition relevant technologies such as network solutions, service functions and basic software.  JasPar works in close cooperation with AUTOSAR and FlexRay.
AUTOSAR AUTOSAR  is a development partnership of vehicle manufacturers, ECU manufacturers and manufacturers of  development tools, ECU basic software and microcontrollers. The aim of AUTOSAR is to simplify the exchange of software on different ECUs. To this end, a standardized software architecture has been devised with standardized description and configuration formats for embedded software in automobiles. AUTOSAR defines methods for describing software in vehicles which ensure that software components can be reused, exchanged, scaled and integrated. AUTOSAR is becoming accepted by an increasing number of automakers.
Crucial to AUTOSAR is a logical distribution into ECU specific basic software . This virtual function bus also connects software components implemented in different ECUs. In this way, these can be shifted between different ECUs without changes having to be made in the affected software components themselves. This can be useful in optimizing computing power, memory requirements or communication load.
The functional software components are defined in SWC XML descriptions.
The run time environment provides the communication services between the functional software components and the corresponding basic software on the ECU. The RTE is tailored to the specific ECU and the application. It can be generated to a large extent automatically from the interface requirements.
The basic software contains the ECUspecific program parts, such as the communication interfaces, diagnostics and memory management. The basic software also contains the service layer. This software combines software components for general service functions . The latter is based on the OSEK/VDX OS. In this field, the resources of the ECU are subdivided and managed so as to arrive at optimal network support, memory management, diagnostics, etc.
The hardware used is encapsulated in two layers based on each other. Abstraction of the microprocessor facilitate direct access to microcontroller resources for applications with special functionality and timing requirements. They are also an integral part of the basic software such that the application software can be developed independently of the hardware, even when the services of the complex device drivers are required.
In addition to the ECU architecture, the development methods are also standardized in part by AUTOSAR. This relates, above all, to the structure and the dependencies of the different work products . These are needed in order to generate from the different software component descriptions executable programs for the respective ECUs.
ECU Electronic control unit, ASW Application software, SWC Software components, VFB Virtual function bus, RTE Run time environment, BSW Basic software, OS Operating system.
ECU II ECU m Run time environment AUTOSAR interface SWC 1 SWC 3 SWC 2 AUTOSAR interface BSW RTE VFB AUTOSAR interface OS OS SWC n BSW RTE AUTOSAR interface OS......
Diagnostic standards: Vehicle specific systems for diagnostics for vehicle development and production and for workshops prove to be high maintenance, cost intensive and inflexible. They tie the manufacturers to suppliers and prevent simple data communication in the case of cross company cooperations. Some diagnostic standards have therefore been developed .
Requirements with regard to an exchange format, the "Open Test Sequence Exchange Format" , are currently being defined within the framework of an ISO draft in order to create, use and  exchange diagnostic sequences.
The development process The focal point of software development is the depiction of the logical system  architecture in a concrete software system with all programs and data. Here, the entire processor controlled system of the vehicle is considered. Particular importance is attached to a clear separation of specification, design and implementation. Specification of the software functions is performed on the physical level, while design and implementation of programs and data are geared towards the specific microcontroller.
In order to satisfy the above mentioned requirements in the development of software in automobiles, the defined sequences are, in addition to the technology and the tools, an integral part of development.
Process description models Numerous more or less complicated models are used to describe the workflows in software development. They serve to make the sequences transparent, to compare them, to identify problem areas, and to verify conformity in accordance with defined standards. They were, however, not originally conceived to improve directly the quality of the software itself, to increase efficiency or to eliminate systematic faults in the sequences. Process description models are therefore only partly suitable. The common V model will be described here by way of example.
Principle of the Principle of the V model V model The V shaped representation of the development sequence described here is used in many variations and degrees of detail. The "V model" of the federation for planning and implementing IT projects of  central government in Germany will not be described here.
The V model divides the process steps : associated directly with development along a V, where the x axis depicts the development progress and the y axis the depth, i. e. the degree of detail, of the corresponding process step . A process step can be described by the required input variables, the procedure, the methods, the roles, the tools, the quality criteria, and the output variables. The process steps defined on the left arm are verified on the right arm. These steps can also run several times or be divided.
Process evaluation models Process evaluation models provide, in addition to a pure description of the tasks and sequences, information on the maturity and the quality of the processes. Work steps can thus be compared, evaluated and certified. In this way, it is also possible to identify process gaps which impact, for example, on the product quality or the costs. However, the information on the quality of the processes does not provide a complete picture of the quality of the products themselves here either. The three most important process evaluation models will be described here.
ISO 9000 and ISO/TS 16949 ISO 9000 and ISO/TS 16949 The process oriented EN ISO 9000 standard series and following stipulates the requirements with regard to a quality management system. The focus here is on the interactions and the interfaces. The original emphasis was on production and the customer interfaces.
Development progress System requirements analysis and specification Test specification If nec. adaptation of requirement Degree of detail Calibration and calibrationdata management Integration Acceptance and use Configuration management Quality management Supplier management Project management Requirements and change management Code generation/ Implementation System design Component test Software design System test SAE1176 2E
Compliance with ISO 9000 and ISO/TS 16949 can be verified by certification. CMMI CMMI "Capability Maturity Model Integration" . CMMI offers a framework, the implementation of which calls for a business oriented interpretation and organization of content. It describes what has to be done. The organization must shape the "how" appropriately. The content of CMMI is based on essential industry "best practices". CMMI provides a procedure for process improvement created in the longer term from the path of organization development through to learning organization.
ML Maturity level SAE1177 2E Category Process areas ML2 Configuration management 
level. A maturity level is reached when : all the corresponding process areas are mastered and verified by an assessment. To reach a higher maturity level, the process areas of the maturity levels underneath must also be verified again.
CMMI is used as an improvement and evaluation model for development organizations and offers good support for organization wide process optimization and auditing of suppliers.
Automotive SPICE Automotive SPICE SPICE stands for "Software Process Improvement and Capability Determination". Automotive SPICE ). It is a model for project specific evaluation of software  development processes and concentrates, like CMMI, on the requirements for systematic development. The model content of Automotive SPICE and of CMMI is therefore very similar. Auto motive SPICE concentrates more on the requirements level and affords less scope for the business oriented interpretation of requirements. Automotive SPICE focuses only on the software and only on individual projects. In contrast, the ranges of application of CMMI go further, comprising development activities and services of all kinds and their direction through the organization. Automotive SPICE is used by motor vehicle manufacturers as an evaluation model for software projects of suppliers.
The process assessments are carried out using the two dimensional reference and assessment model. The "process  dimension" serves to identify and select the processes to be analyzed in the assessment, the "maturity level dimension" on the other hand serves to determine and evaluate their respective capability. The maturity level dimension consists of the six maturity level stages "incomplete", "performed", "controlled", "established",  "predictable" and "optimizing".
Maturity level 1 Initial Implicit processes, significant risks with regard to quality, faithfulness to deadlines and costs "Heroics" Process discipline in the projects Consistent, organizationally defined processes Predictable, quantitatively managed processes Continuously improved methods with the aid of statistical methods Change to the processes Improvement Repeatability for similar tasks through explicitly defined processes Improvement through organizational process control Improvement through quantitative validation of the process data Improvement is a fixed integral part in the company Maturity level 2 Managed Maturity level 3 Defined Maturity level 4 Quantitatively managed Maturity level 5 Optimizing SAE1178 1E
Quality assurance : in software development As with any technical product, numerous tools for quality assurance are also used on software. In contrast to mechanics and electrics, quality assurance plays a lesser role in the manufacture of software, since software is relatively easy to reproduce. Important emphases are the overall functionality of the system, the quality standards, mastery of complexity, and application. Because the software in a motor vehicle also includes safetyrelevant systems such as, for example, driving dynamics and driver assistance systems, the verifiability of quality plays an important role. Even the economic representation of the aimed for software quality, especially in complex systems, is very important.
ISO 26262 Based on the IEC 61508 standard has been introduced by the automotive industry for drafting safety related electric and electronic systems in motor vehicles. This comprises requirements relating to both the product and the development process, and thus comprises conception, planning, development, implementation, startup, maintenance, modification, shutdown and uninstallation both of the safety relevant system itself and of the safety related . SIL 1 and ASIL A are the lowest, SIL 4 and ASIL D the highest safety integrity level.
Workflows  of software development in motor vehicles Interdisciplinary cooperation in development .
Model based development Model based development distinguishes between two areas. The logical system architecture comprises and describes the virtual area of the models, while the technical system architecture contains the real ECUs and vehicles. The "logical system architecture" is gray in the figures and the "technical system architecture" is white. This procedure is described in terms of open loop and closed loop control functions, but is also suitable for general  realization of functions for example, for monitoring and diagnostic functions.
A graphics based function model considers all system components and can be used as the basis for a general understanding. In software development, the use of model based development methods, with notations such as block diagrams  or finite state machines, is replacing  written software specifications to an increasing extent. This method of modeling software functions has still other advantages. If the specification model is formally described, i. e. unambiguously and without leeway for interpretation, as a mathematical function, the specification can be executed on a computer in a simulation, and tested quickly and realistically in the vehicle itself by means of "rapid control prototyping". Inconsistencies can also be uncovered more easily.
Methods of automated code generation : can be used to implement the specified function models as software components for ECUs. The function models, therefore, need to contain additional software design information. These may include optimization measures, depending on the product characteristics required by the electronic system. Automated code generation also ensures that the code has consistent quality characteristics.
In the next step, virtual environment models, which are supplemented if necessary by real components such as injectors, simulate the environment of the ECUs, facilitating "In the loop tests" in the laboratory. Compared to test bench and road tests, this increases flexibility and enhances test depth, thereby making test cases easier to reproduce.
Step 1: Modeling and simulation of the software functions for the ECU and of the vehicle, driver and the environment on the computer , Step 2: Rapid control prototyping of the software functions in the real vehicle, Step 3: Implementation of the software functions in the real vehicle, Step 4: Integration and testing of the ECUs with In the Loop test systems, laboratory assemblies and test benches, Step 5: Testing and calibration of the software functions and of the ECUs in the vehicle. Function Logical system architecture Technical system architecture Implementation of software functions f 1 1 f 2 f 3 f 4 Real vehicle, real driver and real environment Software function model Model of vehicle, driver and environment ECU 5 2 3 4 Bus UAE0957 2E
It is useful, therefore, to distinguish between functions at an abstract level, and technical realization at a more concrete level. The concept of a separate abstract and concrete approach can be applied to all vehicle components, the driver, and the environment.
Simulation system Vehicle z w* w y u u y y Environment Driver Setpoint generator Open / closedloop control Actuators System Sensors * * UAE0959 1E
record signals from the plant. A model of : this type can be executed on a simulation system , thus allowing it to be analyzed in more detail.
Rapid control prototyping  of software functions Rapid control prototyping in this context includes all methods for the early implementation of specifications of open loop and closed loop control functions in the real vehicle. To allow this, the modeled openor closed loop control functions must be implemented in the test. Experimental systems can be used as an implementation platform for the software parts of the openand closed loop control functions .
The experimental systems are connected to the setpoint generators, sensors and actuators, as well as the other vehicle ECUs that belong to the overall system. The interfaces to the real vehicle mean that the software functions implemented in the experimental system and in the ECU take into account real time requirements.
Real time computer systems with considerably higher computing power are usually deployed as ECUs in experimental systems. PCs are increasingly being used as the processor core for this task. This allows the model of a software function to be automatically converted from a specification into an implementable model using a rapid control prototyping tool that is subject to standardized rules. The specified behavior can then be modeled as accurately as possible.
Experimental systems with a modular structure can be configured specifically for the application, for example, in terms of the required interfaces for input and output signals. The overall system is designed for deployment in the vehicle, and is operated using a computer, e. g. a PC. This allows the testing of software function specifications directly in the vehicle at an early stage. The specifications can then be changed as required.
Bypass or fullpass applications Bypass applications are mainly used if only a few software functions are under development, and an ECU with tried andtrue basic functionality is available for example, from a previous project.
Bypass applications are also suitable if the sensor and actuator functions of an ECU are very complex, and supporting them requires significant effort on the part of the experimental system .
UAE0960 2E Vehicle z w* w w y y w* u u y* y Environment Driver Setpoint generator Open / closedloop control Actuators ECU Experimental system System Sensors *
Fullpass applications are more suitable : if an ECU of this type is not available, if additional setpoint generators, sensors, and actuators also need to be tested, and if the scope of the ECU is of manageable complexity.
It is also possible to combine a bypass of individual software parts and a fullpass of the entire software. This has the advantage of increased flexibility.
Bypass applications Bypass applications Bypass development is suitable for early testing of an additional or modified software function of an ECU in the vehicle. The new or modified software function is defined by a model and run on the experimental system. This requires an ECU that can run the basic functionality of the software system, support all the necessary desiredvalue generators, sensors, and actuators, and provide a bypass interface to the experimental system. The new or modified software function is developed using a rapid control prototyping tool. It is then run on the experimental system . This approach is also suitable for further developments to existing ECU functions. In this case, the existing functions in the ECU are still used, but they are modified to the extent that the input values are sent via the bypass interface, and the output values from the newly developed bypass function are used. The required software modifications to the ECU are called the bypass hooks. These can also be used in previously compiled software with modern development tools. For the essential synchronization of functional computing between the ECU and the experimental system, a procedure is normally adopted in which the ECU triggers computation of the bypass function on the experimental system via a control flow interface. The ECU monitors the output values of the bypass function for plausibility.
The bypass can also be effected via the vehicle bus . Even direct access to the CPU of the ECU via the microcontroller interfaces is possible by means of an emulator probe.
Virtual prototyping : Virtual prototyping In the case of complex systems, it is advantageous to test functions as early as possible. One possibility is offered by virtual prototyping. Here the prototype is tested on a virtual environment model. The operating system of the later ECU  is often performed automatically in accordance with established standards.
Vehicle z w* w w y y u u u y y Environment Driver Setpoint generator Open / closedloop control Actuators ECU network Bus System Sensors * * * UAE0963 1E
Integration and testing : of software and ECUs Requirements Prototype vehicles are often only available in limited numbers. It means that a component supplier often does not have a complete or up to date integration and test environment for the components supplied. Restrictions in the test environment can sometimes limit the possible test steps. For this reason, the environment models often serve as the basis for test systems and test benches in the integration and test phase.
Component integration is a synchronization point for all the individual component developments involved. The integration test, system test, and acceptance test cannot be carried out until all the components are available. For ECUs, this means that the software functions can only be tested when all the components in a  vehicle system are available .
This allows tests to be performed and automated under reproducible laboratory conditions with a high level of flexibility. In contrast to tests on the test bench or in the real vehicle, the full, unrestricted range of operating states can be tested can be simulated to allow a verification of the robustness of open loop and closed loop control functions.
A significant benefit is also the great test depth which can be achieved through automation. This enables, for example, as many fault types as possible and their combinations to be tested under exactly reproducible conditions and documented by means of a failure log.
UAE0964 2E w y u w y Instrumentation Test objects ECU network Bus u In the Loop test system Vehicle z w* w y u u y y Environment Driver Setpoint generator Open / closedloop control Actuators System Sensors * * * *
A structure as illustrated in Figure 12 depicts the ECUs in the form of a black box. The behavior of the ECU functions can only be assessed on the basis of the input and output signals w, y and u*. This "black box view" is sufficient for simple software functions. But testing more complicated functions requires the integration of a measurement procedure for internal ECU intermediate variables. This type of measuring technique is also known as instrumentation. The testing of diagnostic functions also requires access to the fault memory via the ECU diagnostics interface, and this requires the integration of a measurement and diagnostics system.
, the software code is also tested. However, in contrast to SiL, this runs on the destination hardware. Coupling between the software and the environment model is performed by means of hooks and an emulator probe.
. Combinations of FiL and HiL are also used. PCs are increasingly being used as simulation computers.
UAE0965 3E z w y u u y y Environment Driver Setpoint generator Actuators System Sensors w * Vehicle Instrumentation User interface Test, calibration and diagnostic system Measure, calibrate, diagnose Measuring * *
Calibration : of software functions Procedure Each electronically controlled vehicle system can only then develop its capability when it is optimally adapted to the  respective vehicle type. In order for software functions to be used in as many vehicle variants as possible, these contain variable parameters. Adapting these parameters to the corresponding vehicle variant and for every operating condition  is known as calibration. To reach the desired level of functionality in the complete vehicle, a multitude of characteristic values, characteristic curves and program maps the calibration data must be  applied.
Most changes to the vehicle require a change to the calibration. An example here: The l oxygen sensor in the exhaustgas system measures the residual oxygen in the exhaust gas. The fuel quantity actually injected can be determined on the basis of this signal. In this way, it is possible to adapt the activation parameters in the engine ECU exactly on a continuous basis. Changes to the exhaustgas system which result in a change to the exhaust gas back pressure at the point where the l sensor is installed  must be adapted. If this is not done, this will result in a deterioration in consumption and emissions.
Variant management can be simplified in development, production and service by separating program and data statuses. The program status contains, for example, all the information on the variables to be applied and their limit values and correlations, while the data status contains the variables actually applied.
Calibration takes place in the laboratory on engine and vehicle test benches during vehicle tests and under real environmental conditions on test tracks. In addition to a measurement and diagnostic system, a calibration system is often required to calibrate internal ECU parameters of the series ECU.
The parameter values must be variable during calibration. A calibration system, therefore, consists of one or more ECUs with a suitable interface to a measurement and calibration tool .
Changes to the parameter values, for instance to the values of a characteristic curve, are supported in the calibration tool by editors. Alternatively, these operate on the implementation level or on the physical specification level. Accordingly, the measurement tool converts recorded values into a physical representation or an implementation representation. Figure 14 shows an example of the physical and the implementation levels for a characteristic curve and a recorded measurement signal.
Offline calibration: In offline calibration, the execution of open loop control, closed loop control, and monitoring functions, i. e. of the "drive program", are interrupted to modify or adjust parameter values. Offline application therefore leads to many restrictions. In particular when deployed on test benches and during in vehicle testing, it always causes an interruption to the test bench or road test.
Online calibration In online calibration, the parameter values can be adjusted while the microcontrollers are executing the software functions. It is, therefore, possible to adjust parameter values while executing open loop control, closed loop control, and monitoring functions at the same time, and hence during regular use at the test bench or in vehicle. Online calibration places higher demands on the stability of the open loop control, closed loop control, and monitoring functions, since the driving schedule must remain stable during all adjustment procedures if exceptions occur, for example, if the distribution of interpolation points in characteristic curves fails to rise monotonically for short periods of time. Online calibration is suitable for long term modification of less dynamic parameters .
For applying more dynamic functions or safety critical functions , the settings are not adjusted during actual braking maneuvers. In this case, online calibration can still save time by avoiding any interruptions in the program execution, thus reducing the interval between two test drives.
S Signal, t Time, x Input variable, y Output variable. Indices:  phys Physical representation;  impl Implementation representation UAE0966 2E Measurement and application tool Microcontroller yphys xphys yphys Sphys tphys timpl Simpl xphys 1 ximpl 1 ximpl 2 ximpl 3 ximpl 4 ximpl 5 yimpl 1 yimpl 2 yimpl 3 yimpl 4 yimpl 5 xphys xphys 5...
Outlook: New vehicle functions and technologies will continue to lead to an increase in the scope of software in motor vehicles even in the low price segment. In the process, the number of ECUs stays the same in many vehicles. As a consequence, the scope of functions of some ECUs is continuing to increase. In all, the system limits between the different ECUs are disappearing more and more, such as, for example, in the management of a hybrid drive. The electronics in motor vehicles are thus becoming ever more complex  including beyond an individual vehicle. The economic mastery of complexity is therefore certainly a key element in future automotive software engineering and the associated development environments.
Another trend is the increasing virtualization of development. Virtualization involves integrating parts of later development steps, such as testing and calibration, into the earlier development phases such that the function models can be optimally tested in the loop and fed with data on a preliminary basis early on. In this way, failures are detected earlier, support is provided for distributed development and bottlenecks shortly before series startup are avoided.
 ISO 22900 1: Road vehicles Modular vehicle communication interface  Part 1: Hardware design requirements.
 ISO/TS 16949: Quality management systems Particular requirements for the application of ISO 9001:2008 for automotive production and relevant service part organizations.
 DIN EN 61508: Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety related systems Part 1: General requirements ; German version EN 61508 1:2010.
General: Owing to the increasing demand for safety, comfort, entertainment, and environmental protection, electronic systems in motor vehicles realize an increasing number of functions and are characterized by a high level of networking and complexity. Optimized processes, methods, and tools of system architecture are required to keep on top of this structure in the future too. History Over the many decades of automobile history, there has been a manageable number of electrical systems in motor vehicles: ignition, lighting, windshield wipers, horn, fuel gage, various indicator lamps, and a vehicle radio. Semiconductors were used initially except in vehicle radios only for rectification .
Certain in vehicle functions were realizable with electromechanical means or with discrete electronic components either not at all or only with disproportionately high complexity. Thus, for example, the first electronic antilock braking system  had already been developed in 1970, but was never ready for series production on account of its size, weight and cost. By the mid 1970s the development of integrated circuits for a broad range of applications had also reached and revolutionized automotive engineering.
One of the first instances of the networking of electronic systems came about during the development of the traction control system . This networking was initially realized by purely mechanical means. The throttle valve in the air intake system of the internal combustion engine was fitted with a device which could be activated directly by the traction control system. It was not discernible to the engine management whether the driver or the traction control system was moving the throttle valve.
SVA0055 1E Diagnostics 
the signal to the engine control unit for : reducing the drive torque. This was then implemented in the form of an air supply throttling, an injection blank out or an ignitionangle adjustment.
On account of the ever more stringent exhaust emission regulations the possibilities represented up until that point of coupling between the traction control system and the engine management were no longer sufficient. What was now required was to transmit to the engine management how a reduction of the drive torque requested by the traction control system is effected in the air, fuel or ignition path. It was therefore necessary to come up with a more powerful interface via which a desired torque and a dynamic response request could be transmitted from the traction control system to the engine management. By contrast, the actual torque, the engine speed and the current setting reserve were to be transmitted to the TCS control unit. It proved complex and expensive in terms of the number of cables required to transfer these different data via discrete and, for example, pulse width modulated interfaces. The CAN bus system was introduced in 1991 as an alternative to discrete cabling. In this way, the foundations for the modern networking of systems in motor vehicles were laid.
Technology of the present day In today's vehicles, virtually all the ECUs are networked directly or indirectly , with each other. Aside from the classic communication systems, Ethernet is also used for various vehicle functions which require a large bandwidth. This is the case for example with a 360deg camera for automatic park assist, which enables the driver among other things to have a bird's eye view of the vehicle for example in the infotainment system display.
Because of the powerful networking between the ECUs, some new performance features can even be achieved completely without additional hardware, i.e. purely by means of data communication and software. An example of this is the tire pressure monitoring system and thus does not require any further hardware. As soon as a wheel loses air, the wheel diameter decreases, as a result of which the wheel must turn more quickly and consequently the air loss can be determined by means of an algorithm.
Also classed as state of the art are numerous Advanced Driver Assistance Systems , and many others. All this can be realized with a matching E/E architecture with suitable sensors, such as for example a video camera, radar sensors, and ultrasonic sensors.
Development trends The increasing number of electronic and electrical components in modern vehicles and the constantly increasing complexity necessitate a continuous further development and constant technological advances in E/E architectures. For this reason, E/E architectures of vehicles have in the past obviously changed with regard to the communication technologies and also in their systemic manifestation. Further developments will also be constantly identifiable in the future. The following text will examine the evolution of E/E architectures and provide an outlook of future developments and trends .
Distributed E/E architectures : Distributed E/E architectures modularity and integration modularity and integration The picture of the first E/E architectures and their comparably lower level of complexity was initially characterized by their strong modularity .
Domain centralized E/E architectures Domain centralized E/E architectures In the ensuing step the domain centralized and cross domain centralized E/E architectures not only do the number of electronic and electrical components and the number of functions continue to rise sharply, but also increasingly the dependencies of the functions within the individual domains . The term "domain" refers to the grouping of similar functions. Typical domains are shown in Figure 3.
SVA0056 2E Tomorrow Future vision Today Vehicle centralized E/E architectures Domain independent, vehiclecentralized approaches, characterized by central vehicle computer and peripheral zone ECUs: logic centralization and physical distribution Domain centralized E/E architectures Mastering of complexity through increasing cross domain functions Functionally distributed E/E architectures Predominantly encapsulated E/E architectures Modularity Integration Functional integration Each function has a specific ECU Function specific ECUs Domain specific domain ECUs, domain computers Domain centralization Domain fusion Vehicle computer Vehicle cloud Computing Cross domain ECUs, cross domain computers Domain independent central vehicle computer and zone ECUs Increase in the functions outplaced to the cloud Increase in softwareState of the art ECUs Sensors and actuators
clearly discernible in today's vehicle ar : chitectures and will take on an ever more significant role in future. An example of this is the cross domain function "Vehicle Motion Control", which will be described in more detail later. Thus, in this case, sensors, actuators, and functions from the "Powertrain" and "Chassis and Safety" domains interact directly with each other. In other words, increasingly vehicle wide functions extending over a number of domains stand out. The associated strong logic interaction and networking as well as the resulting dependencies give rise from a functional perspective to a centralization. This means that, instead of the originally modularly distributed arrangements, increasingly functions are being bundled into domain ECUs, domain computers, or event into cross domain ECUs or cross domain computers.
Vehicle centralized E/E architectures Vehicle centralized E/E architectures If one takes a further look into the future, the vehicle is in particular characterized by a high degree of automation, networked systems vehicle internal and vehicle external and by multimedia and infotainment applications. These vehicle properties impose the highest demands on the E/E architecture and on the communication network. In this way, requirements with regard to maximum permissible latencies or the number of hops .
SVA0057 1E Diagnostics 
computer. This is the basic idea behind : centralized E/E architectures, consisting of a central vehicle computer which with extremely high computing capacity constitutes a vehicle wide functional control system and a number of zone ECUs.
Furthermore, even outplacements of logic elements to the back end the socalled cloud are conceivable in order to be able to calculate cross vehicle information and algorithms, for example the calculation of traffic forecasts, not locally but centrally and to make available a number of vehicles or vehicle fleets.
The following section describes using highly automated driving functions how these bring an influence to bear on the E/E architectures in modern vehicles.
SVA0058 2E 1 Zone, front right 2 Zone, door, front right 3 Zone, door, rear right 4 Zone, rear right 5 Zone, front passenger 6 Zone, roof, right 7 Zone, rear seat 8 Zone, driver 9 Zone, front left 10 Zone, door, front left 11 Zone, door, rear left 12 Zone, rear left 1 9 2 3 5 4 12 11 7 10 8 6 State of the art Automotive ECUs  Domain independent zone ECUs
factors driving the development of highly automated driving are, aside from greater road safety, above all increasing comfort and convenience and more time which the driver can use for other activities. Activities like for example writing e mails, surfing the Internet, and many more are then possible while driving.
For highly automated driving to be possible at all, it needs a powerful and reliable E/E architecture. The following section will address which E/E architecture blocks and which adaptations are required for this.
E/E architecture blocks E/E architecture blocks To realize a powerful and reliable E/E architecture, certain E/E architecture blocks are needed. These include among others communication, the vehicle electrical system, the sensor and actuator set, and performant ECUs. For highly automated driving functions it is important that parts of these E/E architecture blocks are always available. This gives rise to high safety requirements, which can only be satisfied by fallback levels in the event of a fault. Such concepts are also called fault tolerant. Here, redundancy can refer to communication, the vehicle electrical system, and the software and the hardware.
Stage Degree of automation Description Driver Automation 0 Only driver Driver constantly performs longitudinal and lateral control No intervening vehicle system active 1 Assisted Driver constantly performs longitudinal or lateral control System assumes the other function in each case 2 Partially automated Driver must constantly monitor the system System assumes longitudinal and lateral control in a specific application 3 Highly automated Driver must constantly monitor the system Driver must potentially be in  a position to take over System assumes longitudinal and lateral control in a specific application System identifies system limits and prompts the driver to take over with a sufficient time reserve 4 Fully automated No driver required in the specific application System can automatically manage all situations in the specific application 5 Driverless System can automatically manage all situations throughout the entire journey No driver required
Fault tolerant vehicle electrical system Like the communication network, the vehicle electrical system must also have a fault tolerant design. The vehicle electrical system can be divided into three elements .
To enable the vehicle to still be controlled accordingly in the event of a fault, the safety related components, which for example implement the braking and steering functions, are supplied by two completely independent storage devices. These two storage devices are in the event of a fault separated via a coupling element, meaning that the fault is encapsulated and consequently the fault is prevented from spreading to the other supply channel. On account of the redundant actuator technology, in this case the safety related functions like braking and steering continue to be available for a limited time at least for a transition to a safe state, even if a supply channel fails. Sensor redundancy concept An important influencing factor for highly automated driving is the vehicle environment. This is detected by a variety of sensors such as radar, lidar, camera, and ultrasonic sensors. GPS and inertial sensors are also used to pinpoint the vehicle position. In combination it is possible to determine both what is situated around the vehicle and where the vehicle itself is situated.
a b d Component Communication line c DC/DC Battery 1 Load Load Battery 2 Basic electrical system G Safety related channel 2 Safety related channel 1 Load S SVA0059 1E SVA0060 1E
ant here that a field of view by sensors A and D. Which sensor principles, sensor combinations, and sensor distributions are ideal to be able to detect the environment in all situations is currently the object of development.
Performant ECUs The vehicle environment and the vehicle position are elementary information for highly automated driving. The sensor data obtained are fused in performant ECUs into an environment model. A lot of computing capacity is required for this processing operation. Fault tolerance is important here so that the sensor data fusion can also be computed in the event of a fault. Among others, for example, either a fault tolerant ECU or a combination of two ECUs with one main path and one substitute path can be used.
To be able to deliver this computing capacity at all, automotive electronics will in future increasingly turn to other disciplines, for example consumer electronics. This will also involve the use of microprocessors in addition to automotive certified microcontrollers.
Camera system Laser sensors Sensors Sensor data fusion Radar sensors Ultrasonic sensors Driver observations Transmission  Steering Internal combustion engine Actuators Electric machine Steering Boost Recuperation Manual Comfort and convenience Assisted Automated Functions Driver Cruise control Recuperation Hybrid driving Parking assistant Valet parking Automated driving ADAS Vehicle Motion Control Braking Accelerating Brake SVA0061 1E
lateral and longitudinal control of the ve : hicle without permanent monitoring by the driver by coordinating and monitoring access to actuators .
E/E architectures for highly automated E/E architectures for highly automated driving driving For the various highly automated driving functions such as for example traffic jam pilot or highway pilot the previously mentioned E/E architecture blocks are required to realize a powerful and reliable E/E architecture. The described stages of the degree of automation can be used to subdivide the driving functions and derive appropriate requirements with regard to the E/E architectures. Reference is made here once again to the importance of the redundant design of the individual E/E architecture blocks for highly automated driving functions which do not require monitoring by the driver.
Development of  E/E architectures Definition of "E/E architecture" As the amount of electronics and networking in the vehicle increases, so too the demand for powerful development processes and their description methods for the architecture of electrical and electronic systems increases.
The term "architecture" generally refers to the art of building. In the construction industry, the architect designs a building by drawing up plans for the different views and contractual work based on the client's wishes and boundary conditions. A plan abstracts the reality with regard to a particular aspect . The building can finally be erected on the basis of the plans of all the necessary aspects.
When carried over to a motor vehicle, this is referred to as the "E/E architecture". "E/E" denotes the electrical and electronic aspects of the motor vehicle. The "plans" of the E/E architect are referred to in the following with the general term of "model". Car manufacturers and their suppliers have different views on how many models of which type are needed to describe completely the electrical and electronic systems in the vehicle. The models presented in the following have proven successful in practice and are a necessary framework for describing the E/E scope. The term architecture is often used in the literature and in publications to denote the models themselves. Here, a clear distinction is made between work operation .
dealt with simultaneously because E/E architecture development in the concept phase of a vehicle addresses both the geometry and new systems which are to be implemented in the vehicle. In the course of vehicle development, the situation may for instance arise where an electronic system in the
Feature and requirement models Feature and requirement models Feature model The feature model defines which performance features . The vehicle scope is defined with the feature model. All further models can be derived and developed on the basis of the features.
Requirement model All the necessary vehicle requirements are set out in the requirement model. These put the features in concrete terms and serve as an input variable for the functional model. Here, for example, the ACC feature can be put in concrete terms with regard to the driving speed. Because the Stop and Go variant of ACC is involved, the lower limit of the speed range must be 0 km/h. The upper limit differs from car manufacturer to car manufacturer . If the feature for example were not a Stop and Go ACC variant, the speed range could be 30 to 200 km/h.
SVA0062 1E General vehicle requirements and features Requirement A Requirement B Requirement C Feature A Feature B Feature C Functions and interconnectivity of functions Component type  Plugs, pins and cable set Distribution of the components in the vehicle topology SEN ACT SEN Sensor ECU ECU ECU Actuator FCT FCT FlexRay CAN FD CAN Signal Signal Signal Wires/Pin FCT FCT FCT ACT ECU ECU ECU ECU ECU ECU Requirement and feature models Functional model Component model Network model Cable set model Topology model
Component model: Component model Technology model The technology model describes what technical realization is used for the specified transfer elements without already combining these into modules, such as electronic control units . "Technology blocks" are created.
Thus, signal filtering can be realized with discrete components by means of a digital circuit or filter software on a microcontroller. Even a controller function can be executed with a discrete electronic circuit or a microcontroller. Voltage stabilization can be achieved by either a smoothing capacitor or a DC/DC converter.
The decision as to a technical implementation is influenced not only by the function, but also by further criteria such as costs, weight, scalability, etc. Before the technology blocks are combined into modules in the form of ECUs, the first step is to look for synergy with the further technology blocks to be integrated. A technological active chain is created . If a specific sensor technology is available, for example, for an active chain link whose signal is required by another active chain, this will also be used. This occurs even if this sensor is overspecified for the additional user, i.e. there are lower requirements, for example, of the available signal range or of the accuracy.
It is nevertheless important to store the original requirement in a database as this synergy may no longer be present in another vehicle. The automotive industry usually uses the nomenclature according to DIN EN 60617 to describe the hardware.
0 to 20 mA Actuator I/O channel I/O channel 0 to 4,095 bits 0 to 2,047 bits 4 to 20 mA m3/h SVA0063 1E SVA0043 2E Sensor technology Destination computation Longitudinal control Acceleration Actuator technology Acceleration Actuator technology Deceleration Longitudinal control Deceleration
Hardware model of the electronic : component This model represents the structure of the electronic hardware of an individual ECU. It is created by allocating specific electronic components from the technological active chains to an electronic module in a node. An ECU is therefore, generally speaking, a collecting point for electronic components of different systems, an "integration platform".
Software for controlling different systems from different sources is integrated on the microcontrollers located in the ECU. By networking the ECUs, it is possible to implement complex distributed functions which utilize sensors and actuators from different installation locations in the vehicle.
During development, initially customary circuit diagrams will be used for the electrical or electronic parts of the ECU. Then the ECU mechanics and the design and connection technology will be established. E/E architecture development is confined to a very rough representation in the early concept phase.
Software model of the electronic Software model of the electronic component component The AUTOSAR standard defines the structuring of software close to hardware level and its interface to the application functions and establishes interfaces between application functions. AUTOSAR additionally defines standardized exchange formats which are supported by popular modeling tools .
Typically, a distinction is made between basic and application software. Blocks of basic software are, for example, device driver software, communication software, operating system, and hardware abstraction.
Network model Network model Network model of communication Because all the technology blocks of a vehicle have been allocated to ECUs in the previous steps, a network of these ECUs is now in place with their communication relationships. The network model of communication represents all the ECUs in the motor vehicle which have bus communication and are thus directly or indirectly networked with each other .
Each signal which is exchanged between two or more ECUs is assigned to a suitable bus system. AUTOSAR defines for this purpose standardized exchange formats which enable bus communication to be described.
Network model of energy supply The allocation of the technology blocks to ECUs and sensor and actuator modules has also given rise to a network of electrical loads/consumers which requires a suitable energy supply. On the one hand, it is important to fuse individual electric circuits so that a short circuit does not affect the entire network. On the other hand, not all circuits should be supplied with electrical energy in each operating state. The principle of "terminals" was therefore introduced for this purpose. Thus, for example, terminal 15 is only supplied with electrical energy when the ignition is switched on. The assignment of the individual terminals to ECUs follows the "terminal concept". Among others, the different vehicle states are required as input for the terminal concept. For example, parts of the energy management and the wake up and go to sleep sequences of the ECUs are realized in the network by means of hardware.
The electrical circuit diagram and the matching with a terminal or fuse can be seen. The terminal designations follow the conventions in DIN 72552 .
The positive pole of the supply voltage is usually featured in the top half of the representation while the negative pole . In this way, the connecting cables between the ECUs and the energy supply leads of the electrical
The topology describes the possible routing paths in the body, such as for example the H structure, which consists of two main connections from the front end to the rear end of the vehicle and a cross cable  from the left to the right side of the vehicle.
Two dimensional models are usually sufficient in the concept phase of a vehicle; detailed three dimensional models are used in the later development phase. E/E architecture development process The E/E architecture development process links the individual draft stages with each other on a logic and time basis and provides quality criteria at the beginning and the end of a draft stage. The individual draft stages are described below.
Requirement management Requirement management The requirements decisively determine the decisions of the E/E architect. It is advisable and common to distinguish between functional and non functional requirements. Functional requirements refer to the desired performance features, the features, which can be used in the vehicle. Non functional requirements refer to the technical solution and are therefore also known as draft restrictions.
of a vehicle radio 15, 30, 31 Terminal designations, A2 Vehicle radio, W1 Vehicle antenna, F Fuse, B11, B12 Speakers, P6 Timer, X18 Diagnosis socket, 1 to 8 Section identification.
space model RL rear left, RR rear right, FL front left, FR front right, FM front middle, IL inside left, IR inside right.
X18 B11 P6 W1 30 F 30 A2 1 W1 15 F 15 31 31 B12 7 6 5 4 3 2 8 Engine compartment Roof Interior FM Interior FR Interior FL FL Lights and lamps FR RL Luggage  compartment    Luggage compartment  Interior RR IL IR Engine compartment Engine compartment Luggage compartment Interior Interior RL Interior RR Door Door Mirror FR Door FR Door RR Door Door Mirror FL Door FL Door RL Lights and lamps SVA0046 2D SAS1038 2Y
Thus, for example, the audio amplifier in : vehicles is frequently installed in the luggage compartment area since the heat in the vehicle passenger compartment cannot be adequately dissipated.
Development of E/E architectures Development of E/E architectures The development of the E/E architecture can follow two paths: The bottom up approach, which starts out from existing components, and the top down approach, which features the implementation of all the previously described modeling steps starting out from the functional and non functional requirements.
In the bottom up approach the creation of the E/E architecture starts out from the functionality of existing components and this is supplemented additionally by function and communication aspects.
This approach is typically chosen for the creation of E/E architectures of successor generations to existing vehicle platforms or if cost restrictions necessitate the use of cost effective components already existing on the market.
The top down approach focuses on the function complexity and is typically chosen for creating E/E architectures of new vehicle platforms. In addition, the functional model will in future play an increasingly more important role, particularly to be able to realize cross domain features. The functional model will be developed independently of the further technical implementation of the E/E architecture. The use of E/E concept tools allows an exchange of data with development partners for electronic components or for the cable set.
Evaluation of models Evaluation of models The following must be observed for all approaches: During the transition from one model hierarchy to the next .
An alternative procedure consists in comparing a reference solution using the evaluation criteria with alternative solutions. This does indeed deliver fast results, but possibly not the global optimum.
Because the evaluation criteria are generally weighted differently by the car manufacturers, the electronic systems of the vehicles sometimes differ considerably from each other.
E/E architecture development tools Ideally a tool is used for architecture modeling which can represent and network with each other the different models and model levels of the E/E architecture work. Fully connected documentation is created in this way. This enables the different disciplines involved in the development process to come on board at the relevant points. It should furthermore be possible to record the modeling properties numerically in order to be able to provide them with an evaluation.
Different E/E architecture development tools have in the meantime come onto the market which enable architecture modeling to be performed on a tool assisted basis. An important point is the standardization of the models and their data formats. Only this facilitates competition between the tool manufacturers and opens up to the different disciplines involved the opportunity of joining the process at different points.
Summary and outlook: As a result of the ever increasing scope and the increasing networking of electronic systems, it is necessary to use suitable processes, methods and tools in E/E architecture development. E/E architecture development has established itself as an independent area of responsibility in the automotive industry and has a decisive influence in the development of new vehicles. It is thereby possible also to render further features in the automobile. These include for example highly automated driving functions like highway pilot or wireless software and firmware updates via the air interface . It is possible through new approaches in E/E architecture development to deliver powerful and reliable E/E architectures in the future as well. If the procedures described in this publication are consistently applied and developed further, the increasing complexity in motor vehicles will also be manageable in the future and will continue to make significant contributions to improving traffic flow, traffic safety, driving comfort, and economical fuel utilization.
________________________________ References References Automated driving, electrification and connectivity the evolution of vehicle motion control. Alexander Haussler, Robert Bosch GmbH .
Bus systems: Networks for data communication, also known as bus systems or protocols, are widely used in today's motor vehicles. Various components such as sensors, actuators or ECUs the nodes or network users are connected to each other via a single channel and transferred to all the other ECUs which are networked as nodes in the bus system.
connected via the bus can be reached from one access point. This provides for simpler diagnostics and the configuration of all the ECUs at the end of the line.
Requirements of buses : General requirements General requirements In order to be able to be used in vehicles, buses must satisfy typical requirements. A bus must use a transmission process which has control over the propagation times, attenuations and reflections of the signals for cables up to 40 m long with which typically all the parts of the vehicle are reached. A network must be able to connect several dozen users in the process.
A bus must be able to withstand the rough ambient conditions in the vehicle with regard to temperature, vibrations and electromagnetic interference.
Because vehicles are produced in high numbers, even small savings potentials in the cost of the bus hardware of the individual vehicle must be utilized in the design of the bus. It must equally be noted that there are several competing manufacturers of bus components.
There is a large number of equipment variants of a vehicle type which must be covered by a basic configuration of the bus. The additional installation of an optional extra must not affect the other vehicle systems.
The performance of the bus must be clearly defined in a public standard in order to have a benchmark against which components can be verified. This ensures that verified components of different suppliers function together in a single network.
Special requirements Special requirements Different systems in the motor vehicle have different requirements and therefore necessitate the use of different buses. The required data transfer rate  very much depends on the application. It ranges from a few bit/s for switching the lights, through engine management with a few 100 kbit/s, right through to video applications with several Mbit/s.
For systems in which a failure or a delayed execution of a function is safety relevant must be guaranteed in all cases. When the time response of the bus is defined and reproducible at all times, this is referred to as determinism. In this way, transfer times for messages, in particular, are already known in the design phase.
For safety systems such as electric power steering it must be verified that everything has been done in terms of state of the art technology to avoid flaws/ faults in design and to ensure correct functioning under all permissible boundary conditions.
Technical principles : Components of a bus In order for a network to function as planned, calculations must be carried out constantly in every node. This is performed for the most part by a special piece of hardware , which can also perform this function although less efficiently. The communication controller can be implemented as a separate semiconductor component; in the case of many microcontrollers, however, communication controllers for some buses are already integrated.
A further component, the bus driver or transceiver, converts the signal which it receives from the communication controller into the physical signal on the bus line . It converts data received on the bus line and forwards them to the communication controller.
Communication protocol Data transfer between the nodes is established in the communication protocol. These agreements relate to the syntax, semantics, and synchronization of communication. The syntax determines which character strings may be used for communication, the semantics define the correct use of syntactically correct constructs.  OSI reference model The ISO , which is often used as the basis for describing and comparing communications protocols. In this model, the function of a data communication system is broken down into different hierarchical layers which each use the functions made available by a different layer. The OSI reference model is an aid to structuring conceptually the function of a communication system. However, finding efficient solutions is not necessarily supported by observing this model.
Seven layers are defined are for the most part not served by motor vehicle buses.
motor vehicles for the most part, electro : magnetic signals in the kHz to MHz range are used on special cables and optical fibers . Radio of different frequencies or the joint use of cables already provided with electrical power for supply purposes are technologies which have not yet been tested in large batches.
The most widely used method is, because of the low costs involved, transmission by cable, particularly as a voltage difference on twisted two wire cables, with or without shielding against radiation, or on single wire cables with a voltage reference to ground.
Optical fibers made from plastic or glass fibers , but are costly to lay and their resistance to aging has not yet been adequately assured.
The physical possibilities of the medium also limit the types of encoding of a bit. With optical media, there are the two states "light" and "no light", which offer encoding by means of amplitude .
Electrical voltage signals on a cable offer different possibilities for representing bits. The simplest and usual method used in motor vehicle buses is encoding in which each bit is assigned a voltage value .
Because the signal level can remain constant over several bit lengths with NRZ encoding, additional measures are required to safeguard synchronization. With bit stuffing a complementary bit is inserted after a defined number of equal bit values; the receiver filters this bit out again.
In the case of bus systems with a high data rate, open cable ends must, if necessary, be terminated by terminating resistors in order to prevent reflections from disrupting the signal shape.
Data link layer Data link layer The data link layer effects the correct transport of data between neighboring nodes. Data bits are arranged into frames. By adding further bits such as checksums or numberings, it is possible to detect or even correct errors that occur during transfer. Alternatively, an error can be rectified by requesting a new transfer.
Network layer Network layer If not every node is directly connected with every other, a route must be found for the data which passes through intermediate stations. The search for a route is also called routing and includes different characteristics of the transmission paths  and the intermediate stations, also called routers.
Transport layer Transport layer The transport layer's functions include disassembling large data packets and reassembling them at the receiver, which the parts potentially reach via different routes at different times, or if transmission errors occur ensuring that a packet is transmitted again. The transport layer also serves to hide the properties of the transmission path from the application and to offer services independently.
Data frame: Data are usually transmitted as fixed structure packets , which, as well as the actual content the user data also contain control and test data such as source, destination, priority and check bits to protect against corruption.
The gross data rate takes into account all the transferred bits, while the net data rate takes into account only the user data. A measure of the efficiency of a bus system is the ratio of net data rate to gross data rate.
Access methods A central function of a network to which several users have access at the same time is the administration of the token in order to avoid conflicts. This is known in buses as arbitration. It should be borne in mind here how urgently a message has to be transported. Different mechanisms are circulated.
Time control Time control With time controlled buses, conflict free access is possible whereby each node receives permanently allocated times .
The latency is limited in the case of time control to a maximum length. The response behavior of the bus system must therefore be predicted with regard to time. The messages  makes it possible to quickly detect when a message fails to materialize, which is required particularly in safety relevant systems such as electric motor operated steering.
Basic cycle Basic cycle Global time base Reference message Space for event driven messages Free transmission window Free transmission window Message C Message C Transmission columns Global time base Reference message Message R Message C Basic cycle Reference message Space for event driven messages Space for event driven messages Message C Global time base Basic cycle Reference message Message U Message C Message A Message M Message A Message A Message A Message M Message M Message M Message D Message D Message T Message R UAE0934 2E
of each other, because in this way the : composabilityof the subsystems into predictable behavior of the overall system is supported. When each subsystem has its independent time slice, two nodes cannot disrupt each other by simultaneously occupying the bus.
communication frequency by interrogating its subordinate nodes. A slave responds only when it is addressed by the master. This method produces defined latencies.
Multi master Multi master In a multi master network, various nodes can access the bus automatically and send a message if the bus appears free. In other words, each node can perform the master role and all the nodes can equally start a message transfer. However, this also means that methods for identifying and dealing with access conflicts must be in place. This can be done, for example, by way of a decision phase with prioritization or a delayed resending.
Forms of communication: The simplest form of communication is the 1:1 connection , in which one transmitter and one receiver are connected via a bus. When a transmitter sends a telegram to several receivers without all the receivers processing this telegram, this is called a broadcast connection. In a multicast connection each receiver processes the telegram provided by the transmitter.
Addressing In order for messages to be transferred via a network and their information to be evaluated, they contain, in addition to the user data , information on the data transfer. This information can be contained explicitly in the transfer or stipulated implicitly. Addressing is required to ensure that a message arrives at the correct receiver. There are different methods of doing this.
User oriented method User oriented method Data are exchanged here on the basis of node addresses .
Most conventional communication systems . A message is identified according to its content by a message identifier which was established in advance for this information type. With this method, the sender does not require any knowledge of the destination of the message, since each receiver node decides for itself whether to process the message. Several nodes can also accept and evaluate the message.
Most bus systems in the automotive field operated according to the message oriented method. Transfer oriented method Transfer oriented method Even transfer features can be used to identify a message. If a message is always sent in a defined time slot, it can be identified using this item. For safeguarding purposes, this addressing is also combined in many cases with a messageor user oriented addressing.
Network topology A network topology refers to the structure of network nodes and connections. This shows which nodes are connected to each other, but not the details, such as the length of the connection for example. For different applications of communication networks, there are different requirements of the topology used.
a Adr 3 Id 3 Id 1 Id 3 Id 6 Id 2 Id 3 Id 5 b Adr 1 Adr 3 Id 3 Id 5 Adr 2 Adr 4 Id 2 Id 4 Id 6 Id 7 UVA0012 3Y
If a node fails, the data expected from this : node are not available to the other nodes in the network, but the remaining nodes can continue to exchange messages.
However, a network with a bus topology will fail completely if the central cable has a fault . A network with this topology can therefore be easily expanded if free connections are available at the central element.
Data are exchanged via the individual node connections with the central star, where a distinction is made between active and passive stars. The active star contains a computer which processes and forwards the data. The network's performance is significantly determined by the performance of this computer. The central node, however, does not necessarily have to have special control intelligence. A passive star only joins the bus lines of the network users.
If one node fails or a connecting cable to the central node is faulty, the remaining network continues to be operational. If, on the other hand, the central node fails, then the entire network is rendered inoperational.
Ring topology Ring topology In the ring topology, each node is connected to its two neighbors. This creates a closed ring , amplified, and sent forward to the next station. The data to be transferred are forwarded in the ring, i.e., from one station to the next, until they reach their intended destination or arrive at the starting point again. When a message has passed through the complete ring, reception is acknowledged by all the nodes. Once one station in a single ring fails, data transfer is interrupted and the network fails completely.
Rings can also be structured in the shape : of a double ring in which data are transferred in both directions. In this topology, the failure of one station or of a connection between two stations can be managed, since all the data continue to be transferred to all the operational stations in the ring. Daisy chain topology Daisy chain topology The daisy chain topology looks like the ring topology when a connection is removed. Here, the first component is connected directly to data processing equipment , thereby creating a chain. Messages thus pass through several nodes until the destination is reached.
a node or a connection, there are diversions along which the data can be routed. This network is therefore characterized by high failure tolerance. However, the costs of networking and transporting the messages are high.
star networks are connected to the main hub . In this main hub, the hubs of the star networks are connected in a ring shape.
Coupling of bus systems Depending on the requirement, different bus systems with different communication protocols are used in motor vehicles. Intermediate stations are required to be able to transfer messages from one bus system to the other.
Repeater Repeater Similar buses are coupled via the repeater. The repeater compensates the attenuation on the lines; it therefore works as a booster. The communication traffic is transferred from one bus system to the other.
Gateway: Gateway The gateway processes the incoming data packets and generates from them the data packets for the bus system to be operated. The gateway thus converts the incoming data in order to send it with the required communication protocol.
Router Router The router forwards to the other bus only those data which are needed by the ECUs connected to this bus .
Standby state With a command the node can be switched to a power saving standby state, the sleep mode, when no data exchange is required. Communication is deactivated in this state.
The node is returned to the normal operating state with a wake up. The different bus systems apply their specific methods to control the sleep mode and the wake up mode.
Transfer reliability An important feature of buses, particularly if they are to be used in safety relevant systems, is their ability to identify faults and, if necessary, to maintain limited operation. This includes the possibility of detecting the corruption of data. Electromagnetic radiation from the surroundings  on the cables may cause some bits to assume incorrect values at the receiver. These incidents can be identified by transferring check information in addition to the data.
The simplest case is an additional parity bit, which is used to detect whether the correct number of ones is even or uneven. A more elaborate method is the block securing method , in which different levels of protection can be achieved with a selectable number of check bits. The transmitting node generates via the encoding rule the check information and thereby supplements the telegram to be sent. The receiver calculates from the received telegram the check information according to the same algorithm and compares it with the received value. A data transfer error can be detected in this way.
It is ensured that an item of data sent out by a node, e.g., the vehicle speed, is available either to all the addressees in the network or to none . The other nodes then reject the data already correctly received by them.
Transfer system Logic Logic bus states and bus states and encoding encoding To communicate, the CAN bus uses the two states "dominant" and "recessive", with which the information bits are transmitted. The dominant state represents "0", the recessive "1". The NRZ process  is used as encoding for transmission, in which a zero state is not always returned to between two equal transfer states and, therefore, the time interval between two edges which is required for synchronization can become too great.
For the most part a two wire cable with, depending on the ambient conditions, a non twisted or twisted pair is used. The two bus lines are called CAN_H and CAN_L .
Data transfer rates Very high data rates Applications Networking of control units in the areas of telematics and multimedia Represented by MOST, Ethernet
The two wire cable facilitates a symmet : rical data transfer, in which the bits are transferred via both bus lines using different voltages. This reduces sensitivity to common mode interference, since interference affects both lines and can be  filtered out by creating the difference  .
The single wire cable represents a way of lowering manufacturing costs by saving on the second cable. However, a common ground connection which assumes the function of the second cable must be available to all the bus users for this  purpose. The single wire version of the CAN bus is therefore only possible for a communication system with limited spatial reach. Data transfer on the single wire cable is more susceptible to interference radiation, since it is not possible to filter out interference pulses as on the two wire cable. A higher level signal on the bus line is therefore required. This in turn has a negative effect on the interference radiation. The edge steepness of the bus  signals must therefore be reduced compared with the two wire cable. This is associated with a lower data transfer rate. For this reason, the single wire cable is only used for the lowspeed CAN in the area of body and comfort and con venience electronics. The single wire solution is not described in the CAN specification.
There are also so called fault tolerant transceivers, which communicate via a two wire cable, but if a cable breaks continue operating as a single wire system. Voltage levels Voltage levels High speed and low speed CANs use different voltage levels to transfer dominant and recessive states. The voltage levels of the low speed CAN are shown in Figure 1a, those of the high speed CAN in Figure 1b. The high speed CAN uses, in the recessive state on both lines, a nominal voltage of 2.5 V. In the dominant state, nominal voltages of 3.5 V and 1.5 V are applied to CAN_H and CAN_L respectively. In the low speed CAN in the recessive state, a voltage of 0 V  is applied to CAN_L. In the dominant state, the voltage at CAN_H is min. 3.6 V and at CAN_L max. 1.4 V.
1.5 0 2.5 CAN_H CAN_L 3.5 V 1.4 3.6 CAN_L CAN_H 0 5 V dominant recessive recessive Level states Nominal potential Nominal potential dominant recessive recessive Level states b a SVC0018 2E SVC0020 2E
Limits: Limits It is important for the arbitration method in the case of CAN that all the nodes in the network see the bits of the message identification simultaneously so that a node while it is still transmitting a bit sees whether another node is also transmitting. Delays result from the signal propagation time on the data bus and the processing times in the transceiver. The maximum permissible transfer rate is thus dependent on the overall length of the bus. ISO specifies 1 Mbit/s for 40 m. For longer lines, the possible transfer rate is roughly inversely proportional to the line length. Networks with a 1 km reach can be operated with 40 kbit/s.
CAN protocol Bus configuration Bus configuration CAN operates according to the multimaster principle, in which a linear bus topology connects several nodes of equal priority rating.
This involves assigning a fixed identifier to each message. The identifier . Thus, the CAN requires no station addresses for data transmission, and the nodes are not involved in managing the system configuration. This facilitates adaptation to variations in equipment levels.
Logic bus states Logic bus states The CAN protocol is based on two logic states: The bits are either "recessive" . When at least one station transmits a dominant bit, it overwrites the recessive bits simultaneously sent by other stations.
Provision Message transmission CAN Station 1 CAN Station 2 Bus CAN Station 3 CAN Station 4 Adoption Selection Reception Adoption Selection Selection Reception Reception Bus line 1 0 Station 1 loses arbitration Station 3 loses arbitration Station 1 1 0 Station 2 1 0 Station 3 1 0 UAE0284 3E UAE0742 2E
nant bits transmitted by a station overwrite : the recessive bits of other stations . Transmitters respond to failure to gain bus access by automatically switching to receive mode; they then  repeat the transmission attempt as soon as the bus is free again.
Data frame and Data frame and message format message format The CAN supports two different message formats, which primarily differ with respect to the length of their identifiers. The standard format has 11 bits, while the extend ed format has 29 bits. Thus, the data frame to be transmitted contains a maximum of 130 bits . The "Start of Frame" indicates the beginning of a message and synchronizes all nodes.
The "Arbitration Field" consists of the message's identifier and an additional control bit. While this field is being transmitted, the transmitter accompanies the transmission of each bit with a check to ensure that no higher priority message is being transmitted . The control bit determines whether the message is  classified under "data frame" or "remote frame".
The "Data Field" has an information content of between 0 and 8 bytes. A message of data length 0 can be used to synchronize distributed processes.
Transmitter initiative Transmitter initiative The transmitter will usually initiate a data transmission by sending a data frame. However, the receiver can also request data from the transmitter. This involves the receiver sending off a "Remote Frame". The "Data Frame" and the corresponding "Remote Frame" have the same identifier. They are distinguished by the bit that  follows the identifier.
and the end of the "CRC Field", each "Data Frame" or "Remote Frame" may contain a maximum of five consecutive bits of the same polarity. The transmitter follows up a sequence of five bits of the same polarity by inserting a bit of the opposite polarity in the bitstream. The receivers eliminate these bits again as the messages arrive.
tains several bit fields with a fixed  format for verification by all stations. Error handling Error handling When a CAN controller detects an error, it aborts the current transmission by sending an error flag. An error flag consists of six dominant bits; it functions by deliberately violating the stuffing convention and the formats.
Fault confinement with local failure Fault confinement with local failure Defective stations can severely impair the ability to process bus traffic. Therefore, the CAN controllers incorporate mechanisms which can distinguish between intermittent and permanent errors, and local station failures. This process is based on statistical evaluation of error conditions. Implementations Implementations The semiconductor manufacturers offer different implementations of CAN controllers which differ primarily in the extent to which they can store and manage messages. In this way, the host computer can be relieved of protocol specific activities. A standard categorization is Basic CAN controllers, which have only a few message memories, and Full CAN controllers, in which there is room for all the messages necessary for an ECU.
Standardization Standardization The CAN has been standardized for data exchange in motor vehicles; for appli cations with a low transfer rate up to 125 kbit/s as ISO 11898 3 ).
Time triggered CAN The extension of the CAN protocol to include the capability of operating in timetriggered mode is called "Time Triggered CAN" . It is fully configurable with regard to the proportion of time triggered to event driven communication components, and is therefore fully compatible with CAN networks. TTCAN is standardized as ISO 11898 4 .
CAN with flexible data rate CAN FD extends CAN by a second bit rate and a wider data field. Unlike the nominal bit rate previously applicable to CAN, the data bit rate is not limited to 1 Mbit/s. The data bit rate acts exclusively on the data field within the data frame, whereas the nominal bit rate still acts on the control data.
In addition, CAN FD increases the data field from 8 to up to 64 bytes. This also necessitates adaptations to the checksum so as not to compromise transmission reliability. CAN FD is standardized as ISO 11898 7 .
FlexRay is the first automotive communication standard to have been created in a consortium of vehicle manufacturers, suppliers and semiconductor manufacturers. It contains elements from TTCAN, Byteflight and other technologies. The specifications published by the FlexRay Consortium are today available as ISO standard 17458 .
Transmission media The transmission medium used in a FlexRay system is a twisted pair twowire cable where both shielded and nonshielded cables can be used. Each FlexRay channel consists of two strands, Bus Plus  for encoding. The bus state is identified by measuring the voltage difference between Bus Plus and Bus Minus. Data transfer is thus less sensitive to external electromagnetic influences, since these act equally on both strands and cancel each other out in the difference.
When different voltages are applied to the two strands of a channel, four bus states can be assumed; these bus states are referred to as Idle_LP is applied to Bus Plus and Bus Minus. In the Idle state, a voltage of 2.5 V with a maximum difference of 30 mV is applied to BP and BM. In order to place the channel in the Data_0 state, at least one transmitting node must apply a negative differential voltage of 600 mV to the channel, for Data_1,600 mV, based on a mid level of 2.5 mV.
Topologies FlexRay networks can be structured as bus topologies and star topologies. Two stars can be cascaded when signal  delays are taken into consideration in the stars. Topologies in which several buses are connected to a star are also possible. Because both channels of a FlexRay system can be structured independently of each other, it is possible for different topologies to be used for both channels. For example, one channel can be structured as an active star topology, the other as a bus topology.
On account of the frequencies, which can : be ten times those of CAN, it is necessary when designing a FlexRay network to ensure in all topologies in particular that parameters such as line length and terminating resistors are selected in such a way that signal distortions remain in the permissible range.
Bus access, time control In order to achieve determinism, i. e. the guarantee of a maximum duration for the transmission of a message, communication is performed in the FlexRay bus on a time controlled basis in cycles of constant duration. Each cycle first features a static segment which is divided into time slots of equal length . Each time slot is permanently assigned a maximum of one node which is permitted to transmit at this time.
This is followed by a dynamic segment in which bus access is regulated by the priority of messages. The split between the static and dynamic segments is freely configurable, but cannot be altered during operation. The same applies to the lengths of the time slots, which are configurable, but must remain constant during operation.
The "Symbol Window" can optionally be defined as the third element in the cycle. This can be used to transmit a single symbol. Symbols are provided to wake a network and to test functionalities.
Synchronization Each network node requires its own time generator, which it utilizes to decide the time for transmitting and to determine the duration of the bits. The internal time generators of several nodes may deviate from each other on account of temperature and voltage fluctuations and manufacturing tolerances. In a bus system such as FlexRay, which controls bus access via time slots, it is therefore necessary to ensure that the deviation of the clocks from one another remains within a permissible range through regular corrections. To this end, some nodes assume the role of time generators, to which the other nodes regularly synchronize their internal clocks. The procedure adapts both the zero points in which the zero point of the cycle can be shifted. Thanks to this procedure a "global time" is provided in all the nodes; this time is given in macroticks. The synchronization mechanism causes the length of one  macrotick to be the same on average in all the nodes.
When the network is switched on, a common conception of time on the part of all the nodes must first be established. The start up process, which takes a little time, serves this purpose. Likewise, a node which intends to synchronize itself to a running network needs a period of time to be taken into consideration.
A2 Slot1 A1 B1 Slot2 B1 Slot3 Static segment Communication cycle Dynamic segment Symbol window Network idle D1 Slot4 C1 C2 Slot5 Slot6 Channel A Time t A3 Channel B Time t A4 B2 D2 D3 MTS SVF0012 1E
Arbitration in the dynamic segment: Messages can be given different priorities in the dynamic segment. The duration until a message is transmitted cannot be guaranteed for this. The priority is established by the frame ID, which may be allocated only once in the network. The messages are transmitted in the sequence of their frame ID. To this end, each node runs a counter , which is increased when a message is received. If the slot ID  assumes the value of the frame ID of a message ready in this node, it is transmitted. If the length of the dynamic segment is not sufficient for all the messages, the transmission process must be shifted to a later cycle.
The data frames in the dynamic segment can have different lengths. The limits of the dynamic slots on the two channels are independent of each other. Thus, there may be messages with different slot IDs on the channels at one time.
size of the user data. For all the slots in the static segment this field always contains the same value. Data frames in the dynamic segment can have different lengths.
Payload Payload The user data which are processed further by the host are transmitted in the payload segment. For data frames in the static segment the first payload bytes can optionally be declared to the network management vector. The controllers or all the vectors received in the cycle and make them accessible to the host. For data frames in the dynamic segment the first payload bytes can optionally be declared to a 16 bit message ID. In both cases, subsequent handling is left to the software.
Reserved bit Payload preamble indicator Null frame indicator Sync frame indicator Startup frame indicator Frame ID Payload length Header CRC Cycle count Data 0 Data 1 Data 2 Data n CRC CRC CRC UVF0011 2E
Generating a frame bitstream Before a node can transmit a data frame with the host's data, the data frame is  converted into a "bitstream". To this end, the data frame is first deconstructed into individual bytes. A Transmission Start  Sequence is inserted ahead of each frame byte.
In the event that the data frame is in the dynamic segment, it is possible to append to the bitstream a further Dynamic Trailing Sequence of configurable bit length. This prevents another node from starting its transmission via the channel early.
Operating modes FlexRay can be placed in a mode in which the nodes need only minimal power and in which all the operations of the encoding and decoding process are stopped, but can be woken up by a signal on the bus line. Here, the bus driver is still capable of detecting special signals on the bus and then also of activating its host by means of a corresponding signal. Each node can transmit a wake up.
hardware possible in the node. Typical  applications are the door module with door lock, the power window units, doormirror adjustment, and air conditioning system .
of LIN bus 80% 20% 0 UBat Time t Rise time Sender recessive dominant Time t Receiver dominant Voltage level Voltage level 60% 40% 0 UBat Drop time recessive SVL0003 2E
Transfer system: The LIN bus is designed as a non shielded single wire cable. The bus level can assume two logic states. The dominant level corresponds to a voltage of approximately 0 V and represents logic 0. The recessive level corresponds to the battery voltage Ubatt and represents the logic 1 state.
Because of the different design variations of the circuitry, the levels may be subject to differences. The definition of tolerances for transmitting and receiving in the field of the recessive and dominant levels ensures a stable data transfer. The tolerance bands are wider at the receiving end so that valid signals can also be received in spite of interference radiation.
The transfer rate of the LIN bus is limited to 20 kbit/s. This is a compromise between the demand for high edge steepness to synchronize the slaves easily on the one hand and the demand for low edge steepness to improve EMC performance on the other. Recommended transfer rates are 2,400 bit/s, 9,600 bit/s and 19,200 Bit/s. The minimum permissible value for the transfer rate is 1 kbit/s.
The maximum number of nodes is not stipulated in the LIN specification. Theoretically, it is limited by the number of available content related message identifiers. Line and node capacities and edge steepnesses limit the combination of length and node number of a LIN network; a maximum of 16 nodes is recommended.
Bus access In the LIN bus, access is provided on the basis of the master slave access method. The network features a master, which  initiates each message. The slave has the opportunity to respond. The messages are exchanged between the master and one, several or all the slaves.
master begins with a header. The message field contains different information depending on the type of message. If the master transmits control instructions for a slave, it describes the message field with the data to be utilized by the slave. In the event of a data request, the addressed slave describes the message field with the data requested by the master.
Header Header The header is made up of the synchronization break .
Synchronization: Synchronization A synchronization takes place at the start of each data frame to ensure a consistent data transfer between master and slaves. First the start of a data frame is clearly identified by the Synch Break. It consists of at least 13 consecutive dominant levels and one recessive level.
After the Synch Break, the master transmits the Synch Field, consisting of the bit sequence 01010101. The slaves thus have the opportunity to adapt themselves to the master's time base. The clock pulse of the master should not deviate from the nominal value by more than +0.5 %. The clock pulse of the slaves may deviate prior to synchronization by up to +15 % if the synchronization achieves a deviation of max. +2 % up to the end of the message. The slaves can thus be designed without an expensive quartz  oscillator, for example with a cost effective RC circuit.
Of the 64 possible messages, 32 may contain only two data bytes, 16 four data bytes, and the remaining 16 eight data bytes.
The last two bits in the Ident Field contain two checksums, with which the identifier is protected against transmission errors and resulting incorrect message allocations.
Data field Data field Transmission of the actual data begins after the master node has transmitted the header. The slaves identify from the transmitted identifier whether they are addressed and, if necessary, transmit back the response in the data field.
Several signals can be packed into a data frame. Here, each signal has exactly one generator, i. e. it is always described by the same network node. During operation it is not permitted to change the signal allocation to another generator, as would be possible in other time controlled networks.
LIN description file LIN description file The configuration of the LIN bus, i. e. the specification of network users, signals and data frames, is performed in the LIN description file. The LIN specification provides for a suitable configuration language for this purpose.
From the LIN description file, tools automatically generate program sections which are used to implement the master and slave functions in the ECUs located on the bus. The LIN description file thus serves to configure the entire LIN network. It is a common interface between the vehicle manufacturer and the suppliers of the master and slave modules.
Message scheduling Message scheduling The scheduling table in the LIN description file determines the order and time frame in which the messages are transmitted. Frequently needed information is transmitted from time to time. When the table has been worked through, the master begins again with the first message. The sequence of processing can be altered depending on the operating state .
Thus, the transmission frame of each : message is known. The deterministic performance is guaranteed by the fact that all the transmissions are initiated by the master in the case of master slave access control.
Network management Network management The nodes of a LIN network can be placed in sleep mode in order to minimize closed circuit current. Sleep mode can be achieved in two ways. The master transmits the "Go to Sleep" command with the reserved identifier 60, or the slaves automatically go into sleep mode if there has been no data transfer on the bus for an extended period of time , all the nodes must be initialized and be able to respond to the master.
Ethernet is used in series production  vehicles; e. g. in the BMW 7 Series, where it is used to input vehicle data at the end of production.
Transfer system The Ethernet versions differ in terms of transfer rate, physical design of the channel, and encoding. Coaxial cables, twisted two wire cables with one or more core pairs, optical fibers, radio paths, or even power supply cables are specified as channels. Encoding differs accordingly. Originally, coaxial cables in a bus topology were used as the medium. Here, the transceivers of the nodes were connected either directly or with T pieces to the cable. Today, twisted two wire cables are widely used. The transfer rates have been increased from initially 10 Mbit/s via the Fast Ethernet with 100 Mbit/s and the Gigabit Ethernet with 1,000 Mbit/s up to 10 Gbit/s.
Topology: The size of a network is limited by the fact that the signal propagation time between two nodes influences the arbitration process. This can be bypassed by subdividing into segments, which are connected by way of special components hubs and switches. A hub functions as an amplifier which re establishes the ideal signal shape of a bit if it has been corrupted by interference or dispersion on the transmission medium. A switch checks entire packets for correctness with regard to the checksum and directs packets without collision to another output if the destination address can be reached by this route. To this end, it must have the option of storing messages temporarily. As well as the costs involved in the hardware, a disadvantage when such elements are used is that the data stream is delayed. For this purpose, however, nodes with different data rates can be connected.
Today, networks are usually designed in such a way that each node is connected to the output of a switch, i. e. there is no  direct connection between nodes. Switches themselves are in turn connected via a higher level switch in such a way that a tree shaped structure is  created.
Ethernet protocol Bus access Bus access To transmit, a node checks whether there are signals on the bus. It starts to transmit when it deems the line to be clear.  Because of the signal propagation time between two nodes, the situation may arise where two nodes deem the bus to be clear and start to transmit virtually simultaneously. The data frames transmitted in the process are destroyed. The nodes identify this, abort their transmission, and wait a certain amount of time different for each node until they begin with a new transmission attempt. This destruction of data frames reduces the effective transfer rate to a tolerable extent provided bus  utilization is not too high.
This arbitration process limits the length of messages and the propagation time, i. e. the reach. There are no priorities among the messages. A maximum duration for transmission can, therefore, not be guaranteed.
structure of a data frame. The preamble is a periodic bit sequence  and thereby generates a signal to synchronize the receiver. Messages contain the address of their source and their destination. Each network card has a unique address. The receiving nodes compare the destination address with their own card address and accept the data frame if they match. With multicast and broadcast addresses, several receivers can also be addressed.
of Ethernet protocol 8 bytes Preamble Destination address Source address Length, type Data, filler bytes CRC 6 bytes 6 bytes 2 bytes 46 1,500 bytes 4 bytes SVF0051 1E
The PSI5 is based on already existing interfaces for peripheral airbag sensors, but has been developed as an open standard which can be used and implemented at no extra charge. The technical characteristics mentioned in the following, the low implementation expenditure and the low additional costs compared with an analog sensor connection make the PSI5 an  attractive option for sensor applications in motor vehicles too.
Transfer system The PSI5 is a two wire current interface in which the same lines are used to power the sensors and for Manchester encoded data transfer. The bus master in the ECU modulates a voltage to the sensor for this purpose. Data transfers from the sensor to the ECU are effected by current modulation of the supply lines. In this way, high EMC robustness and low electromagnetic radiation are achieved. A wide range of supply currents for the sensors can be supported.
nous mode can be used for a unidirectional point to point connection. In the three synchronous bus modes  several sensors can communicate on a time controlled basis with the bus master bidirectionally and using TDMA processes.
For example, the operating mode "PSI5P10P 500/3L" denotes a parallel synchronous mode with ten bits per data word and parity bit for error detection. The data are transmitted every 500 us with three time slots per cycle and a low bit rate.
operating modes A Asynchronous mode, P Parallel, synchronous mode, U Universal cabling, D Daisy chain cabling, P Parity bit, CRC Cyclic redundancy check, L Low .
SVA0052 1E Phase 1 Sync Start Phase 2 Sync Slope Phase 3 Sync Sustain Upper limit Lower limit T Phase 4 Sync Discharge t1 t0 t2 t3 t4 Voltage Time SVA0054 1E
During communication from sensor to : ECU, a "low level" is represented by a normal .
channel), for example to transmit configuration data for a navigation system and to update software in control units. Requirements Requirements The transmission of multimedia data both audio and video data requires a high data rate and also synchronization of the data transfer between source and sink as well as between a number of sinks.
Transfer system Physical layer Physical layer The MOST standard specifies both optical and electrical technologies of the physical layer . Whereas MOST 25 technology has continued to  develop in Europe for a many years and has become established in the Korean market, the Japanese market in particular prefers MOST 50, the second generation of the multimedia standard.
The identification number, for example in the case of MOST 25, stands for a transfer rate of approx. 25 Mbit/s. The exact data rate depends on the sampling rate that the system uses. With a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz, the MOST frame  are currently also available.
The MOST Network Interface Controller : is a hardware controller that is  responsible for control of the physical layer and implements important transfer mechanisms.
Protocol Data transfer Data transfer Data transfer on the MOST bus is organized in data frames that are created by the timing master with a fixed data rate and passed on by the devices in the ring. Data frames Data frames The timing master usually creates data frames with a clock rate of 44.1 kHz, more rarely also 48 kHz. The size of the data frames thus determines the bus speed of a MOST system. In the case of MOST 25, the size of a data frame is 512 bits . This means that between 24 and 60 bytes are permitted for the synchronous area and between zero and 36 bytes are permitted for the asynchronous area. The preamble is used for synchronization; the parity bit is used to recognize bit errors.
Transmission of Transmission of control messages control messages The control channel is used to signal device statuses and for the messages required for system administration. So that the control channel does not occupy too much bandwidth per frame, it has been distributed to 16 frames grouped to form a block. Each frame transports two bytes of the channel . In order to ensure recognition of the block start, the preamble of the first frame of a block bears a special bit pattern. In the case of MOST 25, the control channel has a gross bandwidth of 705.6 kbit/s.
Transmission of Transmission of multimedia data multimedia data The synchronous channels are used for realtime communication of audio and video data, whereby the data interchange is  controlled via the corresponding control commands on the control channel. A synchronous channel can be assigned a  certain bandwidth, which occurs with a resolution of one byte of a data frame. A stereo audio channel with a resolution of 16 bits, for example, requires four bytes. In the case of MOST 25, depending on the value of the boundary descriptor, a maximum of 60 bytes are available for synchronous channels; this corresponds to 15 stereo audio channels.
Transmission of Transmission of package data package data Data are transferred packet wise on the asynchronous channel. It is therefore suitable for the transmission of information that has no fixed data rate but requires high data rates at short notice. Examples are the transmission of track information of an MP3 player or a software update.
In the case of MOST 25, the asynchronous : channel has a gross bandwidth of up to 12.7 MBit/s and it currently supports two modes: a slower 48 byte mode in which 48 bytes are available in each package for the net data transmission as well as a 1,014 byte mode that is more complex to implement. In order to ensure reliable transmission and flow control for the typically large asynchronous channel data volumes, an additional transport protocol .
Topology Topology MOST is organized in a ring structure   and all the devices therefore share a joint system frequency that they acquire from the data flow. The devices are thus in phase and can transfer all data synchronously. This makes mechanisms for signal buffering and signal processing superfluous. A certain device acts as "timing master" and generates the data frames used for data transfer and to which the other devices synchronize.
Addressing Addressing The devices are addressed on the MOST bus via a 16 bit address. Various types of addressing are available: Logical and physical addressing as well as group addressing for simultaneous addressing of a defined group of control units.
Administration functions Administration functions The MOST standard defines the management mechanisms necessary for the operation of a MOST system. These mechanisms are described below.
Network master The network master is implemented by a marked device in a MOST system and is responsible for the configuration of the system. In current systems, the network master is usually implemented using the head unit of the infotainment system. This device is often also the timing master at the same time. The other devices of the MOST system are referred to as network slaves in this context.
of the MOST bus Data Node A e.g. CD player SVM0007 1E
Function block: Function block A function block defines the interface of a certain application or of a system service. The sinks and sources for multimedia data are each assigned to an FBlock that provides the corresponding functions for their administration. An FBlock can therefore have a number of sources and sinks enumerated via a source and sink number.
An FBlock has functions that deliver information regarding the number and type of sources and sinks that it provides . Over and above this, each FBlock with a source has an "Allocate" function that it uses to request a synchronous channel and connect the source to that channel. Accordingly, an FBlock with a sink has a "Connect" function to connect the sink to a certain synchronous channel and a "DisConnect" function to break off this connection.
An FBlock is addressed by means of an 8 bit FBlockID, which specifies the type of the FBlock, and an additional 8 bit InstID. Function classes Function classes To standardize the way in which functions are defined, the MOST standard specifies a series of function classes for properties. These determine which properties the function has and which operations are permissible.
Applications Applications As well as defining the lower layers necessary for data transfer, the MOST standard defines the interfaces for typical applications from the area of vehicle infotainment systems, e. g. a CD changer, amplifier or radio tuner.
Standardization Standardization The MOST standard is maintained by the MOST Cooperation, which also publishes the corresponding specifications. The specifications are available on the homepage of the MOST Cooperation .
The MOST Corporation was founded in 1998 by BMW, Daimler, Becker Radio, and OASIS Silicon Systems with the aim of standardizing MOST technology.
Serial Wire Ring: Internal buses do not leave the ECU. They connect the integrated circuits , impedances, and bit rate can be configured differently, depending on the requirement.
Features The Serial Wire Ring in the SPI. As the price for these advantages the SWR requires a more complex logic in the transmitter and in the receiver, particularly to recover the clock signal from the data stream.
Only two pins per user provide for small housings and less wiring on the board. This is made possible by a ring topology as pictured in Figure 1. This has the additional benefit of the master being able to read back all data and thereby discover transmission errors. This is an important feature for safety related systems.
Topology The ring consists exclusively of point topoint connections, providing for high data rates. Each connection transmits the data from precisely one source to precisely one destination in only one direction : Master Slave 0 Slave 1 ... Slave N 1 Master.
The ring contains one master and 1 to 16 slaves. Since all are similarly connected to each other in the ring, it is optionally possible for alternately a different module in the ring to assume the role of master. Each user in the ring forwards the received signal with two clocks delay to the next user. The level of the signal is thereby conditioned. Even small time fluctuations of the signal edges . In this way, different signal levels can be realized within a ring.
Transmission is performed according to : the following scheme: The lowest value bit is always transmitted first and the highest value bit is transmitted last.
Clock rate The clock rate is not tied down to specific values, but can be chosen to suit the required data rate and latency. The lower limit is 1 MHz, the upper limit is determined by the slowest user and the line routing. Signal transmission from precisely one source to precisely one destination facilitates higher data rates than with a branched line such that the Serial Wire Ring can be operated at 10 to 100 times the clock frequency of the Serial Peripheral Interface. The demand for higher speed mentioned at the start is thus fulfilled.
Data transmission The interframe symbol and the data frame or the interrupt frame are transmitted alternately by the master on the data line .
Addressing Addressing The slaves are addressed via an address field in the data frame. Each slave receives its address automatically via its position in the ring during the initialization of the ring. The first slave receives the address 0, the last of N slaves receives the address N 1.
Data frame Data frame The data frame serves to transmit user data between master and slave. With the same data frame the master can also send data to several slaves and receive data from several slaves. At the same time it is possible to transmit data from slave to slave, but only in the circulation direction of the ring.
Interrupt frame Interrupt frame Interrupt frames are regularly sent by the master within a fixed time interval. Each slave which has reserved one or more bits in the interrupt frame can use such a bit to trigger a specific reaction in the master. This reaction usually consists of delivering or collecting data.
Interframe symbol Interframe symbol To enable each user in the ring to detect the start of a frame, the interframe symbol is situated between two frames. It is 14 bits long and differs from each possible 14 bit sequence of the 4b/5b encoded signals in at least two bits. This ensures that a 1 bit error does not lead to the appearance of an interframe symbol in the regular 4b/5b data stream. Each user in the ring compares the last 14 received bits with the interframe symbol. If they match, the user begins to evaluate the frames that now follow. In the event of errors, it aborts the evaluation and waits for the next interframe symbol.
Data frame counter Data frame counter The data frame counter is a 2 bit counter which the master increments before it sends a new data frame. This is important in the event of a transmission error that the master notices when reading back. It then repeats the data frame with the same DFC. If the error has occurred on the way from the master to the slave, the slave now receives the data frame for the first time and evaluates it. If the error has occurred on the way from the slave to the master, the slave now receives the data frame for the second time, detects this by the unchanged DFC, and now does not evaluate it for a second time. Slave address Slave address The slave address SLADR addresses the slave. The primary addresses 0 to N 1 address precisely one slave at the corresponding position in the ring. Higher values up to 31 are used for group addresses. While the ring is being initialized, the master can instruct one or more slaves to execute a particular operation automatically if a certain group address appears, for example to output bits 12 to 16 to five output stages. In this way, the master can carry out complex data transfers later without further instructions and thus very quickly simply by using the associated group address. The participating slaves then "know" what is to be done. Parity bit Parity bit PAR is a parity bit for the first eight bits. It is sufficient in order to detect 100 % of all single bit errors. Double bit errors are detected by the master when reading back and lead to a bus reset. Therefore they do not have to be detected by PAR. This procedure is possible because doubleand multiple bit errors are very rare.
Primary address In the event of a primary address, i.e. if the master only addresses this slave, the slave processes the entire data field and if necessary places an answer at the end of the data field. In the process it overwrites part of the data field so that the master can no longer read back its message to the slave. If this is not permitted for security reasons or if the slave's answer is already longer than the master's message, the master must configure the data field bigger and for example append zeros. The slave then overwrites only this areas and no old data are lost. However, this gives rise to a larger data field, i.e. a longer transmission time.
Group address: In the event of a group address, each slave can, according to its previously learned instructions, evaluate and change any bits of the data field.
Cyclic redundancy check Cyclic redundancy check The concluding 10 bit CRC is supported by slaves for which this is useful. There are also simple slaves which do not support the CRC in order to save costs. The CRC is required to back up critical data on their way from the slave to the master. Because, while the master can detect all the other transmission errors when reading back, this is not possible with the answer data from a slave. The slaves which belong to a group address must all jointly use the CRC, or not.
Filler bits Filler bits Because of the 4b/5b encoding the data frame must always contain a multiple of four bits. It may therefore be necessary finally to append up to three more zeros in order to reach the next multiple higher of four.
Sequence control in the master As transmission rates increase, it is becoming increasing more difficult for a CPU to make available the transmission data in good time via a simple send and receive register and to collect the received data fast enough. Therefore the SWR master automatically accesses the memory. This memory also contains one or more chained lists with instructions as to which transactions the master is to execute .
Once activated, the master works through a queue instruction by instruction down to the last instruction or to an instruction with a set stop bit. A software command, an external trigger or the already described prompt by a slave by means of interrupt frame can reactivate the queue.
The end of a queue can refer back to the start and thereby form a closed loop. In this way, the same instructions can be executed again and again. If an instruction is disrupted by a transmission error, the master repeats it automatically.
Each instruction contains a priority. This does not play a role as long as only one queue is active. However, as soon as several queues are active and therefore several instructions are due to be executed at the same time, the master selects the instruction with the highest priority. ________________________________ References References  ISO 11898: Road vehicles Controller area network .
Automotive applications: Sensors and actuators form as the periphery the interface between the vehicle with its complex drive, brake, chassis system, and body functions and the digital electronic control unit  it was necessary to acquire the wheel speed. Wheel speed sensors which operate according to the same measuring principle as the engine speed sensors were used for this purpose. The further development of these speed sensors led from the inductive sensor to the active sensor with an improvement in measured value acquisition.
The applications of the respective sensors are specified in parentheses. UAE0816 3E Drivetrain Safety Comfort and convenience Radar ranging sensor 
Sensors for driver assistance systems Sensors for driver assistance systems A completely new type of sensor was introduced with the ultrasonic sensors for the parking aid. These sensors as well as radar and video sensors sense the vehicle's environment or surroundings and thereby facilitate a wealth of driver assistance functions . These sensors are complex systems and cannot be compared with the classic sensors.
Main requirements Operating conditions Operating conditions Automotive sensors are sometimes exposed to extreme conditions in their installation locations. These are mechanical stresses . The degree of stress to which a sensor is subjected is determined by the operating conditions at its installation location.
Manufacturing costs Manufacturing costs Electronic systems in vehicles contain up to 150 sensors. This abundance of sensors forces engineers to radically reduce costs compared with other areas of use. Extensively automated manufacturing processes working at great efficiency levels are used. In other words, each process step is always performed simultaneously for a larger number of sensors. The manufacture of semiconductor sensors typically involves the simultaneous integration of 100 to 1,000 sensors on one silicon wafer.  The automotive industry's huge demand for sensors has set new standards here. Accuracy requirements Accuracy requirements The accuracy requirements for automotive sensors are lower than for sensors for the process industry for example. The permissible deviations are generally greater than 1 % of the upper range value of the measurement range. The inevitable influences of aging must also be taken into consideration here.
However, ever more sophisticated and complex systems call for higher levels of accuracy. This can be achieved to a certain extent by reducing the manufacturing tolerances and by improving the adjustment and compensation technologies. "Integrated sensors" provide for a significant advance here.
Basic principles of classic : sensors Function Sensors convert a physical or a chemical . An adapter circuit is generally used to convert the sensor's signals into the standardized form required by the ECU. In addition, system operation can be influenced by sensor information from other processing elements for example via bus systems and/or by driver operated switches.
Sensor classification Sensors can be classified according to very different standpoints. With regard to their use in motor vehicles, they can be categorized as follows.
a) Continuous, linear, b) Continuous, nonlinear, c) Discontinuous, multistage, d) Discontinuous, dual stage with hysteresis. X X X X S S S S a c b d UAE0288 1E UAE0286 1Y a b t t U f U U f Tp Tp U ECU D FCE AD MS SE/ECU E SE AC DPL SA Z Z Ph UAE0287 1Y
Continuous signals are constantly available at the sensor output, discontinuous signals are available only at discrete times. A bit serially output signal is inevitably discontinuous.
measuring point, and common calibration and compensation of sensor and circuit, are simplified and improved by storage of the individual correction information in semiconductor memory chips .
SE Sensor, SC Signal conditioning Buscompatible Buscompatible Multiple access ECU ECU 1st Integration level 2nd Integration level 3rd Integration level
Micromechanics: Applications Applications Micromechanics is defined as the application of semiconductor technology in the production of mechanical components from semiconductor materials . This type of application exploits both the semiconducting and the mechanical properties of silicon. The first micro mechanical silicon pressure sensors were installed in motor vehicles at the beginning of the 1980s. Typical mechanical  dimensions can extend into the micrometer range.
to those of steel. However, silicon is significantly lighter and has greater thermal conductivity than steel. Single crystal silicon wafers are used with almost perfect mechanical properties. Hysteresis and creepage are negligible. Due to the brittleness of the single crystal material, the stress strain curve has no plastic range; the material ruptures when the elastic range is exceeded.
Two methods of manufacturing micromechanical structures in silicon have established themselves: volume micromechanics together with some additional special procedures .
Volume micromechanics Volume micromechanics The silicon wafer material is processed at the required depth using anisotropic . Using this method, very small membranes can be produced with typical thicknesses of between 5 and 50 um, as well as openings, beams and webs as are needed for instance in pressure and acceleration sensors.
Quantity Unit Silicon Steel Stainless steel Tensile load 10 5 N/ cm 2 7.0 4.2 2.1 Knoop hardness kg/ mm 2 850 1,500 660 Modulus of elasticity 10 7 N/ cm 2 1.9 2.1 2.0 Density g/ cm 3 2.3 7.9 7.9 Thermal conductivity W/cm * K 1.57 0.97 0.33 Thermal expansion 10 6 /K 2.3 12.0 17.3 1 a b 2 1 2 UAE0691Y
stage and then a passivation stage. This : etching and the subsequent passivation of the walls are set such that very precise vertical walls are created. This process can be used for both volume and surface micromechanics.
Surface micromechanics Surface micromechanics In contrast to volume micromechanics, surface micromechanics merely uses the silicon wafer as the substrate. Moving structures are usually formed from polycrystalline silicon layers which, similarly to a manufacturing process for integrated circuits, are deposited on the surface of the silicon by epitaxial growth.
Among other things, surface micromechanics is used in the manufacture of capacitive acceleration sensors for airbag systems and in the manufacture of yaw sensors for applications in driving dynamics control and in rollover sensing.
in surface micromechanics a) Depositing and structuring the sacrificial layer, b) Depositing polysilicon, c) Structuring polysilicon by deep etching, d) Removing the sacrificial layer and  so producing freely moving structures  on the surface.
The core of the APSM process is  porous silicon. This can be manufactured selectively and on a locally limited basis in p doped silicon in an electrochemical anodizing process in hydrofluoric acid.  In this process some of the silicon is dissolved out of the crystal to leave a porous, sponge like silicon shell, the "porous silicon". Porous silicon in turn can be rearranged at high temperatures. The silicon shell dissolves and forms under suitable conditions a thin membrane on the surface. A cavity forms below this membrane . This thin membrane can be enlarged to the target thickness by means of epitaxial growth.
The monocrystalline epitaxial layer is used for example as the diaphragm of a pressure sensor. Evaluating circuit elements in the epitaxial layer outside the diaphragm provide for a high precision, small and inexpensive pressure sensor. Modern pressure sensors, e. g. barometric pressure sensors for engine management systems, are manufactured using the APSM process.
Wafer bonding Wafer bonding In addition to structuring the silicon, joining two wafers represents another essential task in micromechanical production engineering. Joining technology is required, for example, in order to hermetically seal a reference vacuum chamber .
In the case of anodic bonding, a Pyrex glass wafer is joined to a silicon wafer at a voltage of some 100 V and a temperature of approx. 400 degC result in a permanent hermetic bond between the glass and the silicon.
In the case of seal glass bonding, two silicon wafers are contacted by way of a glass solder layer applied in a screen printing process at approx. 400 degC and under the exertion of pressure. The glass solder melts at this temperature and produces a hermetically sealed bond with the silicon.
________________________________ References for Sensors References for Sensors Basic principles Basic principles U. Hilleringmann: Mikrosystemtechnik Prozessschritte, Technologien, Anwendungen. B.G. Teubner Verlag, Wiesbaden 2006.
in silicon with the APSM process 1 Silicon, 2 Cavity, created from porous silicon  by the APSM process, 3 Membrane, 4 Evaluating circuit.
In this sector of applications, activities have long since been directed at changing over to proximity or non contacting sensor principles. Such sensors are wear free and thus have a longer service life as well as being more reliable. The costs involved though, often force vehicle manufacturers to retain the "wiper type" sensor principle, and such sensors still perform efficiently enough for many measurement purposes. In practice, incremental sensor systems are also often referred to as angular position , there is the possibility of permanent interference.
Wiper potentiometer Measurement principle Measurement principle The wiper potentiometer usually designed as an angular position sensor measures travel by exploiting the proportional relationship between the length of a wire or film resistor . At present, this is the lowest priced travel and angular position sensor.
To protect against overloading, supply voltage is usually applied to the measurement track through series resistors RV. These resistors can also be used for calibration of zero point and curve slope. The shape of the contour across the width of the measurement track influences the shape of the characteristic curve.
U0 Supply voltage, UA Measurement voltage, IA Wiper current, R0 Resistance of measurement track,  Ra Resistance of part of measurement track,  RV Series resistors, RS Protective resistor, a Measurement angle.
and potentiometer track; here wipers can : have a spoon or scraper shape and have a single or multiple design, even in the shape of a broom.
Advantages of the potentiometer are, for example, the low costs, the simple and clear design, the large measuring effect .
Disadvantages of the potentiometer are, for example, mechanical wear caused by abrasion, measuring errors caused by abraded remnants, wiper lift off in the event of vibrations, and the limited miniaturization capability.
Wiper potentiometer applications Wiper potentiometer applications Throttle valve angle sensor Mounted on the throttle valve in a gasoline engines is a throttle valve sensor . This makes available two independent signals which can be checked for plausibility against each other. Redundant measurement enables faults to be detected.
Accelerator pedal sensor The accelerator pedal sensor senses the travel or the angle of the pressed accelerator pedal. The enginemanagement system interprets this value as a torque request from the driver. The accelerator pedal sensor is integrated  together with the accelerator pedal in the accelerator pedal module. With these units that are ready for installation there is no need for adjustment on the vehicle. With the potentiometric sensor design the measurement signal is generated by a potentiometer. The engine ECU converts the measured voltage using the stored sensor curve into the covered pedal travel or into the accelerator pedal's angular position.
signals are thus available for the purpose : of fault detection. Sensor versions with low idle switches were also customary in the past; the state of these sensors had to be plausible with the measurement signal of the potentiometer.
A further switch for detecting a kickdown can be integrated in the acceleratorpedal module of vehicles with automatic transmissions. Alternatively, this signal can be derived from the rate of change of the potentiometer voltage or generated when a threshold value is exceeded.
Fuel level sensor The level in the fuel tank is transmitted by the float via the float lever to the potentiometer .
Magnetically inductive sensors Of all the sensors which perform noncontacting position measurement, magnetic sensors are particularly non susceptible to interference and robust. This applies in particular to those principles relying on alternating current, in other words magnetically inductive principles. Compared with a micromechanical sensor though, the coil configuration needed here requires far more space. This means therefore that there is no favorable possibility of redundant  design.
Measurement principle,  Measurement principle,  short circuiting ring sensors short circuiting ring sensors Of all the established principles of magnetically inductive sensors it is mainly short circuiting ring sensors that have up to now been used by Bosch in motor  vehicles. These sensors sense for example the control rack position in diesel inline fuel injection pumps . However, these are no longer used in a macromechanical design form for new developments.
Measurement principle,  Measurement principle,  eddy current sensors eddy current sensors When an electrically conducting disk . This influences both the equivalent resistance and the inductance of the coil. The disk thus acts as a damper disk.
1 Electrical connections, 2 Wiper spring, 3 Contact rivet, 4 Resistor board, 5 Bearing pin, 6 Twin contact, 7 Float lever, 8 Float, 9 Base of fuel tank.
A high operating frequency is required : due to the low coil inductance. This necessitates a direct assignment of electronic circuitry to the sensor.
Application: Position sensor for transmission control In automatic transmissions position sensors sense the position of final controlling elements are used.
In the eddy current sensor the rotor rotates with the selector lever shaft . A return coil is mounted on the rotor. The fixed sensor board contains redundant transmitter and receiver coils with the associated evaluation electronics. The transmitter coil induces in the return coil an eddy current opposing its cause whose magnetic field induces a voltage in the receiver coil. The geometries of the return coil and the receiver coils are matched to each other in such a way that continuously variable rotor positions can be sensed. The rotatory position sensor thus determines the selector lever positions P, R, N, D, 4, 3, and 2.
1 Selector lever shaft, 2 Sensor board, 3 Redundant transmitter and receiver coils, 4 Redundant evaluation electronics, 5 Rotor with return coil.
Angle a U1 60deg U2 U3 a b Stator U1 U2 U3 i Rotor b a 2 1 3 4 5 SAE1085 1Y SAE1016E
of rotation to be measured can be cal : culated with great accuracy from these voltages. This is the mode of operation of the sensors referred to in classical metrology as synchro, resolver, or inductosyn processes, and preferably configured as angular position encoders.
essary conductor track structures are at least in the case of the fixed part .
Situated on the stator is a circular conductor track loop which, independently of the angle of rotation, induces at an operating frequency of 20 MHz an eddy current in a self contained meander loop of roughly equal outside diameter on the rotor. Like the excitation loop, this eddy current creates a secondary magnetic field which overlaps the excitation field such that it attempts to damp it. If there were only a circular conductor track congruent to the stator loop on the rotor instead of the meander, this would simply extinguish the primary field to the greatest possible extent. However, the meander structure creates a resulting multipole field, which can be rotated with the rotor and whose total flux is also virtually zero.
star connected. For the purpose of determining the electrical phase angle a . The ASICs also permit an end of line adjustment of the mechanical and electrical tolerances in production.
Magnetostatic sensors: Overview Magnetostatic sensors measure a DC magnetic field. In contrast to the magnetically inductive sensors with coils, they are far more suitable for miniaturization and can be manufactured at reasonable cost using microsystem techniques. Since DC magnetic fields can easily penetrate through housing walls made of plastic but also of non ferromagnetic metal, magnetostatic sensors have the advantage that the sensitive, generally fixed part can be well encapsulated and protected in respect of the rotatory part usually a permanent magnet or a soft magnetic conductive element and in respect of the environment. Above all, galvanomagnetic effects are used.
The coefficient RH crucial to the measurement sensitivity of the chip is only comparatively small in the case of silicon. However, because the chip thickness d can be made extremely thin using diffusion techniques, the Hall voltage UH attains a technically acceptable value again. When silicon is used as the basic material, a signal conditioning circuit can be integrated on the chip. Sensors using these principles are thus cheap to produce. In terms of measurement sensitivity, temperature coefficient, and temperature range, however, silicon is by no means the best semiconductor material for Hall sensors. III V semiconductors such as gallium arsenide or indium antimonide, for example, demonstrate better properties. Gaussian effect Gaussian effect In addition to the transversally directed Hall effect, semiconductor chips are also subject to a longitudinal resistance effect, otherwise known as the Gaussian effect. Independently of the field direction the  series resistance increases according to a roughly parabolic characteristic curve.  Elements which utilize this effect are called magnetoresistors .
Hall sensors: Hall switch Hall switch In the most simple case, in the Hall switch the Hall voltage is applied to an electronic threshold circuit integrated in the sensor . In other words, it takes a considerable induction jump B to trigger the Hall switch.
Such Hall sensors manufactured for the most part in bipolar technology are indeed very economical, but are at best only good for switch operation . Hall vane switches are too inaccurate for recording analog variables.
Hall sensors using  Hall sensors using  the spinning current principle the spinning current principle A disadvantage of a simple Hall sensor is its simultaneous sensitivity to mechanical stresses of the electrodes with a different polarity sign.
If the desired aim is to avoid the expense of complex electronics to switch the electrodes, it is also possible to integrate in close proximity several Hall sensors  with correspondingly different alignment of the current path, and to add up their signals in the form of an averaging.
Only through these measures was it  possible for Hall ICs to become well suited to analog sensor applications. These measures though barely resulted in a reduction of the sometimes considerable effects of temperature on the measurement sensitivity.
Such Hall ICs are suitable above all for the measurement of small travel distances, in which they register the fluctuating field strength of a permanent magnet as it approaches with a hybrid downstream amplifier.
Applications of Hall sensors: Applications of Hall sensors Position sensors  for transmission control In this type of position sensor for transmission control for linear position sensing four Hall switches are arranged on a printedcircuit board in such a way that they sense the magnetic encoding of a linearly displaceable multipolar permanent magnet and the intermediate ranges and outputs these in the form of a 4 bit code to the transmission control system. For safety reasons the encoding of the position is configured as a single step. In other words, two bit changes are always required until a new position is detected. The sequence of these bit changes corresponds to a Gray code.
Axle sensors Axle sensors sense the body's inclination angle that changes as a result of vehicle load or during braking and acceleration. The range of the headlamps can be adapted to the conditions with this information .
Vehicle inclination is measured by angle of rotation sensors . These are mounted to the body at the front and rear. Compression is measured by a rotary lever which is connected via a pushrod to the vehicle axle. The vehicle inclination is obtained from the difference between the sensor signals on the front and rear axles.
soft magnetic conductive elements, a lin : ear output signal can be generated for a larger angular range without conversion being necessary . Here, the movable magnet's bipolar field is directed through a Hall sensor located between semicircular conductive elements. The effective magnetic flux through the Halleffect sensor is dependent on the angle of rotation ph. The angular range that can be sensed is 180deg here.
with linear characteristic curve up to 90deg using the movable magnet principle a) Layout, b) Characteristic curve with working range A. 1 Rotor disk ,  2 Pole shoe,  3 Conductive element,  4 Air gap, 5 Hall sensor, 6 Shaft.
In the Hall angular position sensor pictured in Figure 15 it is not the field strength but rather the magnetic field direction that is evaluated. The magnetic field lines are sensed by four Hall elements lying in one plane and radially arranged in the xand y directions. The sensor is located between two magnets to generate a homogeneous magnetic field. The sensor signal is formed from the measurement signals of the Hall elements in an evaluation circuit using the arctan function.
Like the potentiometric accelerator pedal sensor these systems also contain two measuring elements in order to obtain two redundant voltage signals for diagnostic purposes.
Magnetoresistive sensors In contrast to the Hall sensors, the optimum chip shape for a magnetoresistor tends to be shorter and squatter, and represents a very low resistance. In order to arrive at technically applicable resistance values in the kohm range, it is therefore necessary to connect a large number of these chips in series. This problem is solved elegantly by adding microscopically fine, highly conductive nickel antimonide needles to the semiconductor crystal. These are located obliquely to the direction of current flow. A further measure is to apply meander techniques to the semiconductor resistor.
with linear characteristic curve up to 180deg using the movable magnet principle a) Principle Characteristic curve.
1 Curve for arrangement  with Hall IC at center point, 2 Curve for arrangement  with Hall IC outside center point, 3 Hall IC,  4 Magnet.
with fourfold Hall sensor with evaluation of magnetic field direction for a measurement range over 360deg a) Layout, b) Measurement principle, c) Measurement signals.
1 IC with Hall elements, 2 Magnet , 3 Conductive element, 4 Hall elements for sensing the  x component of B, 5 Hall elements for sensing the  y component of B.
UAE0997 6E y 90deg 270deg 180deg x NS 90deg 60 30 0 30 60 mT 180deg Angle of rotation ph Flux density B 270deg 1 3 2 4 b a c a b N Bx By Bx 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 S 1 3 2 0deg 180deg Angle of rotation ph Hall voltage sin ph cos ph 360deg 540deg N S 2
it is increasingly linear. There is no upper : limit to the control range, and dynamic response in technical applications can as is the case with the Hall sensor be regarded as free from lag.
Since the temperature sensitivity has a pronounced effect on the resistance of magnetoresistors . A magnetoresistive increment sensor is used to measure start of injection adjustment in diesel distributor injection pumps.
The magnetoresistor's main advantage is its high signal level which is usually in the volts range. This means that amplification is unnecessary, as well as the local electronic circuitry and the associated protective measures which would otherwise be needed. Furthermore, in their role as passive, resistive components, they are highly insensitive to electromagnetic interference and, as a result of their high bias voltage, practically immune against external magnetic fields.
AMR sensors Anisotropic magnetoresistive effect Anisotropic magnetoresistive effect NiFe layers only roughly 30 to 50 nm thick display electromagnetically anisotropic properties, i. e. their electrical resistance changes under the influence of a magnetic field. Resistance structures of this type are therefore called AMR sensors . The metal alloy generally used is also called permalloy.
The coefficient b denotes the maximum possible resistance variation, and is approximately 3 %. If the external field is much stronger than the spontaneous magnetization, and this is usually the case when control magnets are used, the effective angle is almost completely a function of the direction of the external field. The field strength is now irrelevant, in other words, the sensor is now operating in the "saturated state".
a) Full basic form, b) Modified form with hollowed out surface, c) Replacement circuit diagram for b). B Magnetic flux density, UH Hall voltage, I Supply current, ph Angle of rotation, RH Resistors of AMR elements.
therefore follows two full sinusoidal periods. The amplitude uH is, however, very much dependent on the temperature and the air gap between the sensor and the control magnet; it decreases as the temperature and the air gap increase.
The measurement sensitivity of this socalled pseudo Hall element can be considerably increased . Even when the bridge resistors are meandershaped, provided a given minimum conductor width is not dropped below, this still has negligible effect on the signal's sinusoidal shape.
Applications Applications Steering angle sensor The function of driving dynamics systems is to keep the vehicle on the desired course specified by the driver with targeted brake interventions. The steering wheel angle must be known for this purpose. Potentiometers, optical code sensing and magnetic measurement principles are used for measurement.
A steering wheel angle sensor mounted on the steering shaft senses the steering wheel position. Several rotations of the steering shaft can be measured with a dual configuration of pseudo Hall angle of rotation sensors is a clear measure of the absolute angular  position of the steering shaft. The system is designed in such a way that this phase difference does not exceed 360deg for a total of four rotations of the steering shaft, and thereby the clearness of the measurement is assured. Each individual sensor also offers an indeterminate fine resolution of the angle of rotation. It is possible with such an arrangement to resolve the full steering angle range, for example, more accurately than 1deg.
GMR sensors: Giant magnetoresistive effect Giant magnetoresistive effect GMR sensor technology is used in automotive applications for angular position and rpm sensing. The main advantages of GMR sensors over AMR sensors are the natural clearness range within 360deg for angularposition sensing and the higher magneticfield sensitivity for rpm sensing.
GMR layer structures consist of antiferromagnetic, ferromagnetic and nonmagnetic function layers  can be freely rotated with the external magnetic field. This is accordingly referred to as a "free layer".
The resistance changes with a cosinusoidal dependence on the angle between the external field direction and the reference direction. Crucial to the accuracy of the angular position measurement is the stability of the reference magnetization against the effect of the external field. This stability is greatly increased by using an additional artificial antiferromagnet enables smaller gears to be used. This in turn means that it takes up less space.
Measurement principles rpm sensing usually occurs with an incremental sensor system, consisting of a  rotor .
Passive rpm sensors Passive rpm sensors Conventional inductive sensors used in the past were based on the inductive measuring effect. A sensor of this type consists of a permanent magnet and a soft magnetic pole pin surrounded by an induction coil. The pole pin is opposite a ferromagnetic gear. The distance between the gear and the pole pin changes as the gear turns. The time change in the magnetic flux that this causes gives rise to an induced voltage in the coil.
The measuring effect of the inductive sensor is relatively high, eliminating the need for local electronics. It is therefore called a passive sensor. However, the signal amplitude is rotational speed dependent. The sensor is therefore unsuitable for the lowest rotational speeds; it permits only a comparatively small air gap tolerance between pole pin and gear and for the most part is not able to distinguish  air gap fluctuations from rotational speed pulses.
Active rpm sensors Active rpm sensors Active rpm sensors operate in accordance with the magnetostatic principle. The amplitude of the output signal is not dependent on the rotational speed. rpm sensing is thus possible even at very low rotational speeds .
mation is conditioned and amplified, and : then transmitted as injected current in the form of square wave signals. Typical values are 7 mA for the low level and 14 mA for the high level. The current is converted into a signal voltage by a measuring shunt in the ECU.
In a differential Hall sensor there are two Hall sensor elements situated between the magnet and the pulse wheel. Determining the difference between the signals from the two sensor elements reduces magnetic interference signals and improves the signal to noise ratio.
Multipole wheels are also used instead of the ferromagnetic pulse wheel. Here, a magnetizable plastic is applied to a nonmagnetically metallic substrate and alternately magnetized. These north and south poles assume the function of the teeth on a pulse wheel .
AMR sensor The electrical resistance of magnetoresistive material is anisotropic, i. e. it is dependent on the direction of the magnetic field to which it is exposed. This property is  exploited in the AMR sensor. The sensor is located between a magnet and the pulse wheel. The magnetic field lines change their direction when the pulse wheel turns. This gives rise to a sinusoidal voltage which is amplified in an evaluation circuit in the sensor and converted into a square wave signal.
GMR sensor The use of GMR technology constitutes a further  development of active sensors. Their greater sensitivity than AMR sensors means that larger air gaps are possible, which in turn opens up the possibility of use in difficult areas of application. The greater sensitivity also means lower noise at the signal edges.
Sensor shapes Sensor shapes Different sensor shapes are used : the rod shape, the fork shape, and the inner and outer ring shape. Due to its ease of mounting and simplicity, the rod sensor is the most widespread sensor shape. The rod sensor is located near the rotor, the teeth of which approach it and pass by in close proximity. However, it also has the lowest measurement sensitivity. The fork shaped sensor, which is insensitive to axial and radial play, is permissible in some cases, and is also in service in the field. This sensor must be roughly aligned to the rotor when installed. The sensor type in which the sensor surrounds the rotor shaft in the form of a ring is practically no longer used.
peripheral markings. Up to a certain point, this form of sensor permits instantaneous speed to be measured at points on the circumference, and thus the registration of very fine angular divisions.
The rotor is crucially important to measuring rotational speed; however, it is usually part of the vehicle manufacturer's delivery specification, while the actual sensor comes from the supplier. The rotors used almost exclusively up to now have been magnetically passive types, which therefore consist of soft magnetic material, usually iron. They are cheaper than hard magnetic pole wheels and are easier to handle, since they are not magnetized, and there is no danger of mutual demagnetization during storage. As a rule, presuming the same increment width and output signal, the pole wheel's intrinsic magnetism permits a considerably larger air gap.
Magnetostatic sensors are suitable for satisfying the first condition. And, as a rule, they also permit compliance with the second and third stipulations.
The sensor measures that part of the  magnetic field in a certain direction  in space. The arrow marks this direction. S S S S N N N N S N S N S N N a N S N S b c SAE0779 2Y
In the case of wheel speed sensors, at the least the sensor tip, because of its proximity to the brake, should be able to withstand higher temperatures.
Sensor arrangements Gradient sensors Gradient sensors Gradient sensors incorporate a permanent magnet on which the pole surface facing the gear is homogenized with a thin ferromagnetic wafer. Two sensor elements are located on each element's sensor tip, at a distance of roughly one half a tooth interval. Thus, one of the elements is always opposite a gap between teeth when the other is opposite to a tooth. The sensor measures the difference in field intensity at two adjacent locations on the circumference. The output signal is roughly  proportional to the diversion of field strength as a function of the angle at the circumference; polarity is therefore independent of the air gap.
Tangential sensors Tangential sensors Tangential sensors differ from gradient sensors by their reaction to variations in polarity and intensity in the components of a magnetic field located tangentially to the periphery of the rotor. Design options include AMR thin film technology or single permalloy resistors featuring fullor half bridge circuits . In contrast to gradient sensors, they need not be matched to the particular tooth pitch of the rotor and can be designed to sense at a given point. Local amplification is necessary, even though their measuring effect is 1 to 2 orders of magnitude larger than that of the silicon Hall sensors.
In the case of a bearing integrated crankshaft speed sensor , the AMR thin film sensor is mounted together with an evaluation IC on a common lead frame. For the purposes of space saving and temperature protection, the evaluation IC is bent at an angle of 90deg and also located further away from the sensor tip.
Applications Crankshaft speed sensor Crankshaft speed sensor Crankshaft speed sensors are used to measure the engine speed that corresponds to the teeth on the pulse wheel. The microcontroller in the engine ECU records the value of a running timer at the falling edges of the signal and forms the tooth spacing in terms of time from the difference between two edges. At the first tooth after the gap the measured time is very much greater than the preceding time; at the second tooth after the gap the time is again very much less. This tooth is defined as the reference mark. The pulse wheel is mounted so that this position corresponds to a defined angle opposite the top dead center of cylinder no. 1.
the engine is being started, the reference : mark can be reliably inferred on account of the measured differences of the tooth spacing.
Camshaft speed sensor Camshaft speed sensor The camshaft is stepped down by a ratio of 1:2 compared with the crankshaft. It indicates whether a piston moving to top dead center is in the compression cycle or the exhaust cycle. For this reason a camshaft speed sensor is required in addition to the crankshaft speed sensor.
Simple pulse wheels lead to different sensor signal levels only in the area of the reference mark. More complex pulse wheels with segments of different lengths enable the engine position to be detected more quickly when starting and thus provides for rapid starting.
Wheel speed sensor Wheel speed sensor Wheel speed sensors sense the rotational speed of the wheels. This information is needed for example by the drivingdynamics control to calculate the driving speed and the slip. The navigation system requires the wheel speed signals to calculate the distance traveled when there is no GPS reception .
The pulse wheel is permanently connected to the wheel hub. Both steel pulse wheels and multipole rings can be used. This sensor has fewer teeth because the pulse wheel is smaller in diameter than that on an engine rpm sensor.
The sensor element with the signal amplifier and signal conditioning is integrated in an IC, hermetically sealed with plastic, and seated in the sensor head.
Digital signal conditioning enables encoded additional information to be transmitted via a pulse width modulated output signal. One example is direction of rotation detection, which is required for Hill Hold Control that prevents the vehicle from rolling back when starting. The direction of rotation is also used for vehicle navigation to detect backing up . Speed sensor for transmission control Speed sensor for transmission control Transmission speed sensors sense shaft speeds in automatic transmissions. Standard geometries are generally not possible due to the compact designs of  transmissions. Specific sensor versions are therefore required for each transmission. Evaluation circuits with varying  degrees of evaluation algorithm complexity are used to cover the full spectrum of functional requirements.
Oscillation gyrometers: Measured variables Oscillation gyrometers measure the absolute yaw rate along the vehicle vertical axis, the vehicle transverse axis . The signals generated here are used in numerous systems such as for example driving dynamics control, rollover protection systems, vehicle navigation, and damping control.
The Coriolis force is one of the so called pseudo forces and can only be measured in the rotating reference system .
The signal evaluation of the sensor demodulates the sinusoidal Coriolis signal of the micromechanical sensor is removed.
The utilized measuring effects not only are very small, but also require complex signal conditioning. Signal conditioning  directly at the sensor is therefore necessary.
Applications Micromechanical yaw rate sensors Micromechanical yaw rate sensors A seismic mass in the sensor must be  induced to vibrate in order to generate a Coriolis force to measure a yaw rate. In a micromechanical yaw rate sensor .
This sensor is based on a formulation of bulk micromechanics: Two thick oscillating elements fashioned from the wafer by means of bulk micromechanics oscillate in push pull mode at their resonant frequency which measures Coriolis acceleration.
For drive purposes a sinusoidally modulated current is passed through a simple printed conductor on the relevant oscillating element. This generates within the permanent magnetic field operating perpendicularly to the chip surface a Lorentz force which starts the oscillating element moving.
When a mass point m moves in the  y direction at velocity vy and the system  simultaneously rotates about the vertical axis z with yaw rate Oz, the mass point  experiences a Coriolis acceleration ac in  the x direction.
If this sensor is rotated at yaw rate O : about the vertical axis, the drive in the  oscillation direction results in a Coriolis acceleration which is measured by the  acceleration sensors.
The different physical natures of the drive and sensor systems prevent unwanted crosstalk between the two parts. In order to suppress external acceleration .
The high precision micromechanical construction helps to suppress the effects of high oscillatory acceleration which is several factors of 10 higher than the low level Coriolis acceleration .
Here the oscillating element is electrostatically driven by capacitors. In this case the isolation of the drive and detection systems is not longer strictly separated from each other since both systems are capacitive in design.
A centrally mounted rotary oscillator is electrostatically driven to oscillate using comb structures . When the sensor is subjected to a rotation O, the Coriolis force induces a simultaneous "out of plane" tilting motion. Its amplitude is proportional to the yaw rate and is detected capacitively by electrodes located under the rotary oscillator. To prevent this motion from being excessively damped, it is essential to operate the sensor in a vacuum.
The smaller chip size and the simpler manufacturing process do indeed reduce the cost of such a sensor, but the reduction in size also diminishes the already slight measuring effect and thus the attainable accuracy. It places higher demands on the electronics.
1 Oscillation direction, 2 Oscillating element, 3 Coriolis acceleration sensor, 4 Retaining and guide spring, 5 Direction of Coriolis acceleration, O Yaw rate, v Oscillation velocity, B Magnetic flux density.
Here the MEMS element exhibits two seismic masses. Their deflection is effected by Coriolis forces in opposite directions, but by external accelerations in the same direction. A differential evaluation of the two oscillators then frees the signal of the unwanted disturbance values.
Further developments  Further developments  of yaw rate sensors of yaw rate sensors Ongoing development of systems in the field of active and passive safety means that increased demands are placed on the signal quality and robustness of the yawrate sensor. These systems require not only the measurement of the yaw rate, but also the detection of pitching and rolling motion.
For example, a driving dynamics control system is based among other things on measurement of the yaw rate Oz and on measurement of the lateral acceleration ay. ACC systems utilize sensor signals of the yaw rate Oz, the lateral acceleration ay, and the linear acceleration ax. Rollover protection systems on the other hand use sensor information about the roll axis Ox, the vertical acceleration az, and also the lateral acceleration ay.
New sensor generations of micromechanical sensor elements are used here. These sensors measure the yaw rate about either the x axis or the z axis; many of the these sensors also incorporate sensing elements for detecting accelerations in the x , yor z direction.
Measurement of the yaw rate is based here on the principle of the surface micromechanical yaw rate sensor, while accelerations are detected with capacitive surface micromechanical acceleration sensors.
Flow meters: Measured variables The amount of air supplied to the engine must be measured in order to control the combustion process. The mass ratios are the main factors in the chemical process of combustion, thus the actual objective is to measure the mass flow of the intake and charge air. The air mass flow is the most important load variable in gasoline engines; precise pilot control of the air/ fuel ratio presupposes knowledge of the supplied air mass. The exhaust gas recirculation rate is regulated in gasoline and diesel engines by means of the air mass flow.
The maximum air mass flow to be measured lines in the average within the range of 400 to 1,200 kg/h. As a result of the modest idle requirements of modern engines, the ratio between minimum and maximum air flow is 1:90 to 1:100 in gasoline engines and due to the higher idle requirements 1:20 to 1:40 in diesel engines. Because of stringent exhaust emission and consumption requirements, levels of accuracy of 1 to 2 % from the measured value must be achieved. Referred to the measurement range, this can mean an unusually high for motor vehicles measurement accuracy of 10 4.
where the constant is dependent on the tube and the orifice plate cross sections. This pressure difference can be measured directly with a differential pressure sensor or as a force acting on a sensor plate. Pivoting, variable position sensor flaps .
If the density r changes due to temperature fluctuations or the altitude, the measurement signal changes with  __ r . An air temperature sensor and a barometric pressure sensor must be used to compensate for this.
The higher sensitivity of the output signal : required for a large measurement range with small air masses is obtained from the mechanical and electrical design of the air flow sensor used in for example the earlier L Jetronic gasoline injection system.
The closed loop control circuit in the sensor housing does not have to be changed by means of time consuming heat transfers. However, the flow direction is not recognized with this method, and for this reason these sensors sometimes exhibit substantial deviations when strong pulsations occur in the intake manifold.
The hot wire air mass meter was used in earlier engine management systems .
Hot film air mass meters using  Hot film air mass meters using  thick film technology thick film technology The first hot film air mass meter still manufactured using thick film technology  operates according to the same principle as the hot wire airmass meter, but combines all the measuring elements and the control electronics on a single substrate. The flat design heating resistor is located on the back of the base wafer, with the corresponding temperature sensor on the front. The greater thermal inertia of the ceramic wafer results in somewhat greater response lag than that associated with the hot wire air mass meter. The compensation resistor and the heater element are thermally decoupled by means of a laser cut in the ceramic substrate. More favorable air flow characteristics make it possible to dispense with the hot wire meter's burn off decontamination process.
Micromechanical hot film  Micromechanical hot film  air mass meters air mass meters Extremely compact micromechanical hotfilm air mass meters maintain the heating resistor H at a constant overtemperature. This method differs from earlier techniques in dispensing with the heating current as an output signal. Instead, the signal is derived from the temperature difference in the diaphragm detected by the two temperature sensors S1 and S2. Temperature sensors are located in the flow path upstream and downstream from the heating resistor H.
through the sensor measuring cell the response pattern remains nonlinear, the fact that the initial value also indicates the flow direction represents an improvement over the former method using the heating current.
H Heating resistor, SH Heater temperature sensor,  SL Air temperature sensor, S1, S2 Temperature sensors  QM Air mass flow,  s  Measuring location, T  Temperature.
In the HFM5 the evaluation electronics : integrated in the sensor convert the temperature difference measured at S1 and S2 with the aid of an analog circuit into an analog voltage signal between 0 V and 5 V . In the HFM6 and HFM7 the signal is processed with the aid of digital electronics to achieve greater accuracy and a frequency signal is generated. The HFM7 is a further developed version of the HFM6 with improved electronics and the possibility of outputting an analog signal as an alternative to the frequency signal. This voltage or the frequency is converted in the engine ECU via the sensor curve stored in the program into an airmass flow. The HFM8 can also output the conditioned measurement signal via the SENT digital bus interface. The accuracy of measured value acquisition could also be increased with the HFM8.
measuring tube ensures a uniform flow in the measuring tube. The measuring tube is installed after the air filter in the intake tract.
Because of the small size of the measuring element, this flow meter is a partial flow meter, which detects only a specific and very small part of the total flow. The constancy and reproducibility of this division factor have a direct impact on the accuracy of the sensor. A calibration establishes the interrelationship between the air mass QM flowing through the measuring tube and the measurement signal generated from the partial air flow.
The inlet and outlet to the micromechanical measuring element are designed and optimized in such a way that heavier particles, such as dust particles and liquid droplets, do not approach the measuring element directly, but are rather diverted ahead of it. Further modifications to the measuring passage resulted in improved protection against contamination directly upstream of the sensor element.
air mass meter 1 Electrical connections,  2 Measuring tube or air filter housing wall,  3 Evaluation electronics , 4 Sensor measuring cell, 5 Sensor case, 6 Partial flow measuring passage, 7 Outlet, partial air flow QM,  8 Inlet, partial air flow QM.
acceleration sensors a) Excursion measuring acceleration sensor, b) Position controlled acceleration sensor. a Measurement acceleration,  x System excursion, FM Measuring force , FK Compensation force,  IA Output current, UA Output voltage.
In other words, it can be expected that sensitivity is reduced to a factor of 1/4 when the resonant frequency is increased by a factor of 2. It is only below their resonant frequency that such spring mass systems display adequate proportionality between measured variable and excursion.
Position controlled sensor Position measuring systems also permit the use of the compensation method in which the system excursion caused by  acceleration is compensated for by an equivalent restoring force . These position controlled systems also have, on account of their control, higher stiffness and cutoff frequency than excursion systems of the same kind. Any lack of  mechanical damping can be electronically generated here.
Using the dimensionless variable D permits a simple comparison to be made of different oscillatory systems: transient response and resonant response are defined to a large extent by this damping ratio.
For use as a sensor the generated charges are discharged via the external resistor of a measuring circuit or via an internal resistor of the sensor. The sensor therefore can measure dynamically, but not statically. The typical cutoff frequency is above 1 Hz.
Thermal acceleration sensors Thermal acceleration sensors These sensors generate a confined heated gas zone . The gas in this zone has a lower density than the surrounding cooler gas. During an acceleration the low density gas zone moves within the surrounding cooler gas. The resulting asymmetry can be sensed by temperature sensors which are interconnected in a bridge circuit. The bridge voltage constitutes the acceleration signal. This principle is used in numerous applications such as for example rollover sensing, the driving dynamics control, and even in smart phones.
UAE0812 2Y c a b x z y F Q Q Q Q Q Q F F F F F 5 b a a 1 2 3 3 4 UAE1078 1Y
Applications: Piezoelectric acceleration sensors Piezoelectric acceleration sensors Piezoelectric bimorphous spring elements or two layer piezoceramics in the other layer. The metallic layers on the upper and lower sides of the spring element serve as electrodes via which the resulting voltage is tapped. This structure is packed together with the evaluation electronics in a hermetically sealed housing. The electronic circuit consists of an impedance transformer and an adjustable amplifier with specified filter characteristic.
mass. The change in distance between : the upper and lower wafers gives rise to a change in capacitance in the capacitors C1 M and C2 M, and thus a difference DC  that is proportional to the applied acceleration. This in turn changes the electrical signal at CM, which is amplified and filtered in the evaluation electronics. Filling the sensor's hermetically sealed oscillatory system with a precisely metered charge of air leads to a very spacesaving, inexpensive form of damping which also exhibits low temperature sensitivity.
Surface micromechanical  Surface micromechanical  acceleration sensors acceleration sensors Surface micromechanical sensors , which change in opposite  directions when the seismic mass is  deflected. The spring mass system is  subjected during an acceleration to a deflection which behaves linearly to the acceleration via the spring restoring force. An electrical output signal that is linearly  dependent on the acceleration can be  obtained by evaluation of this differential capacitor.
Because of the low capacitance of typically 1 pF the evaluation electronics are therefore integrated together with the sensor on the same chip, or very closely connected to it on the same substrate or leadframe. The raw signal is amplified, filtered, and conditioned for the output interface. Analog voltages, pulse widthmodulated signals, SPI protocols are usual for this purpose.
The mechanical and electrical signal paths of the sensor can be checked with a self test function. The sensor structure is deflected by means of an electrostatic force and the resulting sensor signal is compared with a setpoint value.
acceleration sensor with capacitive tap 1 Spring mounted seismic mass with electrodes, 2 Spring,  3 Fixed electrodes with capacitance C1, 4 Printed aluminum conductor  , 5 Bond pad,  6 Fixed electrodes with capacitance C2,  7 Silicon oxide.
Piezoelectric knock sensor: Piezoelectric knock sensor The knock sensor is in principle a vibration sensor. It senses structure borne sound vibrations that occur as "knocking" in a gasoline engine during uncontrolled combustions . A seismic mass exerts as a result of its inertia pressure forces in time with the exciting vibrations on an annular piezoceramic element.
These forces induce a charge transfer within the ceramic element. This generates between the upper and lower sides of the ceramic element a voltage that is tapped via contact disks. The knock signal generated in the sensor is forwarded to the engine ECU, where it is conditioned and evaluated.
When knocking noises are detected the engine ECU retards the ignition timing and thus counteracts any further knocking . The vibration frequency is typically 5 to 25 kHz.
 1 Annular piezoceramic element, 2 Seismic mass with pressure forces F, 3 Housing, 4 Screw, 5 Contact, 6 Electrical connection, 7 Engine block.
knock sensor signals a) Typical characteristic of combustion chamber pressure Structure borne noise signal sensed by the knock sensor. No knock combustion Knocking combustion 1 5 6 2 3 7 V F F 1 cm 4 UMK1634 2Y SMZ0369E a b 60 40 20 0 20 40 degCA 60 40 20 0 20 40 degCA 60 40 20 0 20 40 degCA 1 2 V 5 0 5 bar Pressure Pressure Pressure Pressure Voltage Voltage 0 20 40 bar c 60 40 20 0 20 40 degCA 60 40 20 0 20 40 degCA 60 40 20 0 20 40 degCA 1 2 V 5 0 5 bar 0 20 40 bar
Measurement principles Dynamically and statically acting pickups or sensors are used to measure pressures. Dynamically acting pressure sensors include for example microphones, which are insensitive to static pressures and are only used to measure pressure pulsations in gaseous or liquid media. Since up to now, practically only static pressure sensors have been used in automobiles, these will be dealt with in more detail here. Static pressure measurement is effected directly by the deformation of a diaphragm.
Diaphragm type sensors Diaphragm type sensors Design The most common method used for pressure measurement . Within a very wide range, its diameter and thickness can be adapted to the particular pressure range. Low pressure measuring ranges lead to comparatively large diaphragms which can deform in the range from 0.01 to 1 mm. Higher pressures demand thicker, low diameter diaphragms which only deform very slightly by a few micrometers.
Strain gage technology The strains on the diaphragm when a diaphragm type sensor is subjected to deformation are sensed by strain gages  specifies the relative change of the strain gage resistor referred to the relative change of its length. For the resistors diffused into the monocrystalline silicon in micromechanical pressure sensors this factor is especially high, typically K 100.
The resistors are interconnected to form a Wheatstone bridge . The measured voltage is a measure of the pressure. This circuit produces a higher measurement voltage than is the case when a single resistor is evaluated. The Wheatstone bridge thus provides for a highly sensitive sensor.
Applications Micromechanical pressure sensors Micromechanical pressure sensors Micromechanical pressure sensors are used for pressure ranges of less than 6 bar .
The measuring cell of the micromechanical pressure sensor consists of a silicon chip in which a thin diaphragm is micromechanically etched . The bridge voltage is a measure of the pressure on the diaphragm.
The bridge signal must still be linearized and amplified. Temperature effects must also be compensated. This is performed either in a circuit integrated on the measuring chip or in a separate ASIC  or in digital form, e. g. via the SENT interface.
The advantage of digital transfer protocols over analog signals is that interface tolerances can still be transferred.
1 Diaphragm,  2 Silicon chip,  3 Reference vacuum,  4 Glass .
chip . For maximum protection, : the much more sensitive side of the chip with the measuring resistors, evaluation electronics and contacts is enclosed in a reference vacuum chamber located between the housing's base and the soldered metal cap.
However, a cheaper arrangement is to seat the silicon chip with etched diaphragm and four strain gage resistors as a measuring cell on a glass base. The reference vacuum chamber is located in a cavity between the diaphragm and the glass base .
Low pressure sensors This design is used in virtually all lowpressure sensors both sides of the diaphragm are subjected to the pressure medium.
a) Reverse assembly   with evaluation electronics,  5 Glass base,  6 Cap,  7 Supply for measured pressure p,  8 Protective gel,  9 Gel frame,  10 Ceramic hybrid, 11 Cavity with reference vacuum chamber, 12 Bonded connection,  13 Manifold wall, 14 Housing,  15 Sealing ring, 16 Temperature sensor,  17 Electrical connection,  18 Housing cover, 19 Measuring cell.
8 9 5 10 4 11 12 17 13 16 15 14 18 19 1 a b c 2 3 4 5 6 7 p p p UAE1025 1Y
The wide variety of applications means that : there is a broad range of mechanical and electrical interfaces. The sensors are screwed into lines or into the crankcase and transmission case. A metallic taper seal has proven effective, but O rings and sealing rings are also used. The design of the medium pressure sensor very much follows that of the high pressure sensor, with the metal diaphragm being replaced by a silicon micromechanics technology sensor element. In this case the sensor elements used in low pressure sensors have been adapted by optimized etching methods for higher pressures and increased bursting pressure strength. Here too the measurement signal of a Wheatstonebridge circuit is evaluated. The sensor signal is conditioned and issued as an analog or a digital output signal. This is done either integrated in a silicon chip .
include braking systems such as the antilock braking system and driving dynamics control, and also industrial hydraulics. Four thin film strain gages are applied to the diaphragm; the measurement principle is the same as for micromechanical pressure sensors. The steel diaphragm insulates the measured medium, differs from silicon in retaining a yield range for enhanced burst resistance, and is easy to install in metallic housings.
Insulated sputtered  offer permanently high sensor accuracy. Amplification, calibration, and compensation elements can be combined in a single ASIC, which is then integrated together with the required EMC protection on a small carrier in the sensor housing.
metal diaphragm, design 1 Electrical connection ,  2 Evaluation circuit,  3 Steel diaphragm  with strain gage resistors, 4 Pressure connection, 5 Fastening thread.
Temperature sensors: Measured variables Temperature is defined as a nondirectional quantity which characterizes the energy state of a given medium, and which can be a function of time and location.
fer greatly in terms of required measuring accuracy and permissible measuring time. For special cases non contact temperature sensors are also used which determine the temperature of a body or a medium on the basis of the .
At many locations temperature is also measured as a secondary variable in order that it can be compensated in cases where temperature variations trigger faults or act as an undesirable influencing variable for example in sensors for other physical variables whose measured value is to depend as little as possible on the temperature.
The voltage measured at the measuring resistor is thus temperature dependent. This analog voltage is digitized in the ECU by an analog digital converter and then assigned via a characteristic curve to a temperature value.
Alternatively, signal processing can also be performed by an evaluation circuit integrated in the sensor; the temperature value is then transferred via a digital interface .
High thermal sensitivity means that applications are restricted to a "window" of approximately 200 K; however, this range can be defined within a latitude of 40 degC to approximately 850 degC by selecting an appropriate NTC. Close tolerances of +0.5 K at a selectable reference point are possible for example by means of read out, but this is also reflected in the cost.
Thin film metallic resistors . Here the values of the trimming resistor connected in series to the measuring  resistor and of the trimming resistor connected in parallel are changed.
The use of layer technology makes it possible to adapt the substrate to the respective application, and thus provide protection against the monitored medium.
a                  b SAE0820 1E
Metal film resistors are generally manufactured and marketed with a basic value  do have the lowest temperature coefficient, but are very accurate and resistant to aging.
RNi Nickel film resistor,  R.
metal oxide) using thick film technology : and sintered at 800 degC to the substrate. Thick film resistors with their higher  resistivity and can for example be lasertrimmed. The measurement effect can be enhanced by using NTC and PTC materials to form voltage divider circuits.
Monocrystalline Monocrystalline silicon  silicon  semiconductor resistors .
1 Contacts,  2 Passivation Thermistor.
1 2 1 a b 0 100 50 0 Measuring temperature TM 100 50 150 degC 0.4 0.8 Resistance R 1.2 1.6 2.0 kohm R 3 4 UAE0825 2E
Torque sensor: Measured variables and application Torque measurement is utilized in a variety of applications in motor vehicles. Torque sensors are used for example to sense the steering torque initiated by the driver.
Electromechanical power steering systems are increasingly being used in vehicles. The essential benefits are simple installation and start up in the vehicle, energy saving, and the suitability of these systems in the vehicle's ECU network for assistance systems to increase comfort and safety.
Measurement principle When it comes to torque measurement, there are two different methods: angle and stress measurement. In contrast to stress measurement methods , angle measurement methods require a certain length of the torsion bar over which the torsion angle can be picked off.
To sense the driver command, it is necessary in an electromechanical powersteering system to measure the torque initiated by the driver. The sensors currently used in series production incorporate in the steering shaft a torsion bar which in the course of a steering torque applied by the driver undergoes a defined torsion linear to the initiated torque . The torsion is in turn measured by appropriate means and converted into electrical signals. The required measurement range of a torque sensor for use in an electromechanical power steering system is usually around +8 to +10 Nm. The maximum torsion angle is mechanically limited by carrier elements to protect the torsion bar against overload and destruction.
To be able to measure the torsion and thus the applied torque, a magnetoresistive sensor is mounted on one side of the torsion bar which samples the field of a magnetic multipole wheel mounted on the other side. The number of poles on this wheel is chosen so that the sensor outputs a clear signal within its maximum measurement range to provide at all times a clear indication of the applied torque. The magnetoresistive sensor used supplies over the measurement range two signals which describe a sine signal and a cosine signal when shown against the torsion bar torsion angle. The torsion angle and thus the torque are calculated in an ECU with the aid of an arc tangent function.
Because the two signals are always permanently assigned over the defined measurement range, in the event of a  deviation from these signals sensor faults can be detected and the necessary substitute measures initiated.
1 Torsion bar , 3 Volute spring for electrical contacting, 4 Sensor module with magnetoresistive  sensor chip and signal amplification, 5 Steering shaft, 6 Magnetic multipole wheel.
Ground Signal 1 N N N N S S S S 4 1 2 5 6 4 3 UAE1063 2E
A volute spring with the required number : of contacts is used to contact the sensor over the torsion range of approx. +2 steering wheel turns. This volute spring serves to deliver the supply voltage and transmit the measured values.
Force sensor Measured variables and application One application of force measurement in motor vehicles is the sensing of the front passenger's weight. Classifying the front passenger by measuring their weight enables the airbag to be deactivated when a small child is sitting in the seat.
The sensor is designed in such a way that preferably the vertical component of the front passenger's weights causes a deflection of the bending beam. The magnet and the Hall IC are arranged in the sensor in such a way that the static magnetic field that penetrates the Hall IC produces an electrical signal linear to the  deflection of the bending beam. The special design of the sensor prevents a horizontal deflection of the Hall IC in respect of the magnet in order to minimize the influence of transverse forces and torques. In addition, the maximum stress in the bending beam is limited by a mechanical overload stop . This protects the sensor particularly in overload situations in the event of a crash.
The force generated by the front passenger's weight is directed from the upper seat structure via the sleeve into the bending beam . The force is then directed from the bending beam into the lower seat structure. The bending beam is designed as a double bending beam as this has an S shaped deformation line. Here the two vertical connecting points of the double bending beam remain vertical for the entire deflection range. This ensures a linear and parallel movement of the Hall IC in respect of the magnet, producing a linear output signal.
of iBolt force sensor a) Conditions for FG < 850 N  .
1 Swinging arm, 2 Air gap, 3 Sleeve, 4 Seat rail,  5 Double bending beam, 6 Magnet,  7 Hall IC.
FG < 850 N FG > 850 N FR FR 2 3 1 a b 4 5 6 7 S N S N S N S N UAE1075 2Y
Gas and concentration : sensors l sensors Measurement principle Measurement principle l sensors measure the oxygen content in the exhaust gas. They are used to regulate the air/fuel ratio in motor vehicles. The name is derived from the excess air factor l. This factor indicates the ratio of the current air volume to the theoretical air volume which is required for a full combustion of the fuel. It cannot be determined directly in the exhaust gas, but only indirectly via the oxygen volume present in the exhaust gas or required to fully convert combustible components. l sensors consist of platinum electrodes which are mounted on a ceramic solid electrolyte that conducts oxygen ions with exhaust gas oxygen. l sensors consequently measure not the real oxygen content in the exhaust gas, but instead that content which corresponds to the chemical equilibrium of the exhaust gas.
Two point l sensors .
clean air) allow their use in systems with direct injection in stratified charge operation and in diesel engines. l control that can be achieved with wide band l sensors results in significant system and emission advantages over two point control with a step change sensor and further applications such as, for example, more accurate monitoring of the catalytic converter and controlled component protection. The high signal dynamic response of wide band l sensors with response times of less than 100 ms improves l control. Operating concept Operating concept All the exhaust gas sensors described in the following consist of two modules: Nernst cell and pump cells.
Nernst cell The incorporation and removal of oxygen ions in the lattice of the solid electrolyte is dependent on the oxygen partial pressure on the surface of the electrode . Thus at low partial pressure more oxygen ions leave than enter. The vacant spaces in the lattice are reoccupied by advancing oxygen ions. An electric field is generated on account of the resulting charge separation at different oxygen partial pressures at the two electrodes. The electric field forces push advancing oxygen ions back and an equilibrium develops at the socalled Nernst voltage.
1 Reference gas, 2 Anode,  3 Solid electrolyte of Y doped ZrO2, 4 Cathode,  5 Exhaust gas, 6 Residual charges on the anode.
Pump cell: When a voltage is applied that is less or greater than the developing Nernst voltage, this state of equilibrium can be changed and oxygen ions actively transported through the ceramic. This creates between the electrodes a current, borne by oxygen ions. Crucial to the direction and intensity is the difference between the applied voltage . With these sensors the oxygen partial pressure of virtually stoichiometric air/fuel mixtures can be measured very accurately due to the steep part of the characteristic curve in this environment and the lowest pollutant exhaust gas possible achieved by regulating the fuel quantity.
. In lean mixtures the Nernst voltage increases linearly with the temperature. In rich mixtures, on the other hand, the influence of temperature on the oxygen partial pressure dominates in the state of equilibrium. The higher the temperature, the higher this oxygen partial pressure.
The establishment of equilibrium at the exhaust gas electrode is also the cause of very small deviations of the l jump from the exact value. The exhaust gas electrode is covered with a porous protective ceramic layer to protect against contamination and to encourage the establishment of equilibrium by limiting the number of arriving gas particles. Hydrogen and oxygen diffuse through the porous protective layer and are converted on the electrode. More oxygen must be available on the protective layer to ensure that the faster diffusing hydrogen is fully converted on the electrode; in all there must be a slightly lean mixture in the exhaust gas. The characteristic curve is therefore shifted in the lean direction. This " l shift" is electronically compensated during  control.
sensor element with reference air passage. Ambient air is used as reference gas in this type. Figure 4 shows the element in the sensor housing. The exhaust gas and reference gas sides are separated from each other by means of a packing seal. The reference gas side in the housing is permanently supplied with reference air via the supply leads.
of a two point l sensor at different  sensor element temperatures Ul Sensor voltage, pA Oxygen partial pressure  in the exhaust gas, l Excess air factor.
1 Ul at 500 degC, 2 Ul at 700 degC, 3 Ul at 900 degC, 4 pA at 900 degC.
0 200 400 600 800 1,000 mV 0.9 Oxygen partial pressure Sensor voltage Ul 0.95 1.0 Lean exhaust gas Rich exhaust gas 1.05 Excess air factor l 10 16 10 19 10 13 10 10 10 7 10 4 10 1 mbar 1 2 3 6 5 4 1.1 102 SAE1234 2E
Systems with a "pumped" reference are : increasingly being used as an alternative to reference air. Pumping refers here to the active transportation of oxygen in the ZrO2 ceramic by injecting a current, in which the current is set so low that it does not interfere with the actual measurement. The reference electrode itself is connected via a tighter output in the element to the reference gas chamber. This results in a build up of excess oxygen pressure at the reference electrode. This system offers additional protection against unwanted gas components penetrating into the reference gas chamber.
Robustness The ceramic sensor element is protected by a protective tube ahead of the direct exhaust gas flow . This contains openings through which only a small amount of the exhaust gas is directed to the sensor element. It prevents heavy thermal stresses from the exhaust gas flow and at the same time provides  mechanical protection for the ceramic  element.
Temperatures in excess of 1,000 degC can be recorded in the exhaust gas, as well as 700 degC at the hexagon head and up to 280 degC at the cable outlet. For this reason, only ceramic and metallic materials are used in the hot area of the sensor.
Most two point l sensors are also fitted with a heater element the sensor element to operating temperature and provides for fast control readiness.
The vertical lines symbolize conductive connections. 1 Exhaust gas, 2 Porous protective layer, 3 Outer electrode  , 6 Al2O3 insulation layer, 7 Heater element, 8 Reference air.
sensor element in the housing 1 Protective tube, 2 Sensor element,  3 Hexagon head, 4 Reference gas,  5 Electrical supply lead, 6 Exhaust gas side, 7 Packing seal,  8 Support ceramic, 9 Contacting.
SAE1235 3E 1 6 2 3 4 8 7 9 5 SAE1236Y UH 1 2 3 O2 O2 O2 O2 O2 O2 O2 O2 H2 NO NO 100 ohm 5 V 1 kohm 56 kohm CO HC Ul 4 5 7 8 O2 H2 6 6
In practice the l sensor after engine start : ing is switched on only after a delay. Water that is produced as a combustion product and condenses again in the cold exhaustgas system is transported by the exhaust gas and can reach the sensor element. If a droplet of this water touches a hot sensor element, it vaporizes immediately and abstracts a large amount of heat locally from the sensor element. The heavy mechanical stresses that occur as a result of thermal shock can cause the ceramic sensor element to break. For this reason, the sensor is often switched on only after the exhaust gas system has been sufficiently heated. In more recent developments the ceramic elements are enclosed in a further porous, ceramic layer which significantly increases robustness against thermal shock. When a water droplet touches the elements, it spreads in the porous layer. Local cooling is spread over a wider area and mechanical stresses are reduced.
the sensor is able to develop the Nernst voltage. After approximately 10 s the sensor is at sufficiently high temperature to indicate externally specified lean/rich changes. It is then possible to switch to closed loop control in the vehicle.
Wide band Wide band l sensor sensor Design and function With the two point l sensor the oxygen partial pressure of stoichiometric air/fuel mixtures can be measured very accurately in the steep part of the characteristic curve. However, where there is excess air improves exhaust emissions to the point of lowemission vehicles, which necessarily calls for measures such as individual cylinder closed loop control.
Design and operating principle The Nernst principle is reversed to wide the measurement range. When a voltage greater than the Nernst voltage is applied to the measuring cell, oxygen is transported as oxygen ions through the pump cell ceramic to the internal pump and discharged there as free, molecular oxygen into the reference air chamber. The resulting pump voltage is obtained from the difference between pump voltage  and the developing Nernst voltage. The inflow of oxygen molecules is limited in order to establish a linear connection with the externally applied oxygen concentration. To this end the admission of exhaust gas is limited by a porous, ceramic structure with specifically set pore radii, the so called diffusion barrier.
If rich exhaust gas is present, the created Nernst voltage of approx. 1,000 mV counteracts the applied pump voltage such that the resulting negative voltage pumps oxygen in the opposite direction into the cavity and thus the linear shape of the characteristic curve is extended into the rich range. The oxygen is obtained for this purpose from the reduction of water and CO2 on the outer electrode.
Depending on the polarity of pump current Ip predominantly reducing exhaust gas constituents  is dependent on the exhaust gas composition, here the characteristic curves of individual exhaust gas constituents are plotted. 1 Rich exhaust gas, 2 Lean exhaust gas, 3 Pump cell, 4 Nernst cell, 5 Diffusion barrier, 6 Curve for O2, 7 Curve for H2, 8 Curve for CH4, 9 Curve for CO, 10 Curve for C3H6.
lean exhaust gas to pump oxygen out of : it. The internal resistance of the pump cell should therefore be very low. In addition, the measurement range in the rich range is limited by the molecule inflow in the reference passage. An oxygen deficiency in the reference caused by a referenceair contamination or over range cannot be clearly distinguished. In the case of exhaust gas exchanges the dynamic response of the one cell sensor is limited by recharging of the electrode capacities when the pump voltage is changed.
To eliminate these drawbacks, the Nernst cell familiar from the step change sensor is combined with the oxygen pump cell described above. In the case of rich exhaust gas , in response to reversing the voltage at the outer pump electrode, oxygen is generated from H2O and CO2, transported inwards through the ceramic, and discharged again in the cavity. There the oxygen reacts with the diffusing, reducing exhaustgas components. The created inert reaction products H2O and CO2 diffused through the diffusion barrier in an outward direction.
The oxygen partial pressure in the cavity is measured by the Nernst cell also connected to the cavity and the pump voltage is corrected by a controller . There is then an oxygen partial pressure of 10 2 Pa in the cavity. Because the diffusion limit current increases with the sensor temperature, the temperature must be kept as constant as possible. The highly temperature dependent resistance of the Nernst cell is measured for this purpose. The operating electronics regulate it by means of the heater element operated with a pulsewidth modulated voltage.
Where the exhaust gas is rich the different diffusion coefficients, which are functions of the masses of the gas molecules, become noticeable through different sensitivities . The signal is therefore used in the ECU for a characteristic curve applied for the relevant gas composition. The sensor's diffusion limit current and thus the sensitivity are very much dependent on the geometry of the diffusion  barrier. It is necessary to adjust the pump current in order to achieve the high accuracy requirement in the manufacturing tolerance. In some sensor types this is done by a hybrid resistor in the sensor plug which acts together with the measuring resistor as current divider. Alternatively, the diffusion limit current can be adjusted already in the sensor element production process by means of specific openings so that there is no need to make an adjustment at the plug. For subsequent calibration of the sensor in the vehicle the oxygen concentration of the air can be measured in overrun conditions and thus the characteristic curve corrected in the ECU.
The vertical lines symbolize conductive connections. 1 Exhaust gas, 2 Porous protective layer, 3 Pump cell, 4 ZrO2 ceramic, 5 Diffusion barrier, 6 Heater element, 7 Nernst cell, 8 Pump electrode, 9 Reference electrode, 10 Al2O3 insulation.
NOx sensor: Application Application NOx sensors are used in the denitrification systems of diesel and gasoline engines. In systems with diesel engines they are installed upstream and downstream of SCR catalytic converters . In systems with gasoline engines they are used downstream of the NOx storage catalytic converter.
In these positions the NOx sensors determine the nitrogen oxide and oxygen concentrations in the exhaust gas and downstream of SCR catalytic converters also the ammonia concentration as a cumulative signal. In this way the enginemanagement system receives the current residual concentration of nitrogen oxides, provides for exact metering, and detects any faults in the exhaust system.
Nitrogen oxides are stored as nitrates in NOx storage catalytic converters. In short rich phases the catalytic converter is regenerated, whereby the nitrates are reduced with the aid of carbon monoxide and hydrogen to nitrogen.
Design and operating principle Design and operating principle The NOx sensor in Figure 8 is a planar three cell limit current sensor. A Nernst concentration cell and two modified oxygen pump cells , as are already familiar from wide band l sensors, form the overall sensor system.
The sensor element consists of several oxygen conducting, ceramic solid electrolyte layers insulated against each other, on which six electrodes are mounted. The sensor is fitted with an integrated heater element which heats the ceramic to an operating temperature of 600 degC to 800 degC. The outer pump electrode exposed to the exhaust gas and the inner pump electrode in the first cavity, which is separated from the exhaust gas by a diffusion barrier, form the oxygen pump cell.
1 2 4 5 6 7 8 A B C 3 200 400 600 Nitrogen oxide concentration Sensor signal 800 1,000 1,200ppm 0 1.0 2.0 3.0 mA
The first cavity contains the Nernst elec : trode, while the reference gas chamber contains the reference electrode. Together they form the Nernst cell. These are the functional components which are identical to those of wide band l sensors.
In addition, there is a third cell the NOx pump electrode and its counter electrode. The former is situated in a second cavity, which is separated from the first by a further diffusion barrier, the latter is located in the reference gas chamber. All the electrodes in the first and second cavities have a common return conductor.
The inner pump electrode is, unlike the inner pump electrode in wide band l sensors, greatly limited in its catalytic activity by the alloying of platinum with gold. The applied pump voltage UP1 is only enough to split oxygen molecules. NO is only minimally dissociated at the adjusted pump voltage and passes the first cavity with low losses. NO2 as a strong oxidizing agent is converted on the inner pump electrode directly into NO. Ammonia reacts to this in the presence of oxygen and at temperatures of 650 degC into NO and water.
Because of the higher voltage at the NO pump electrode and its catalytically improved activity due to the admixture of rhodium, NO is completely dissociated at this electrode and the oxygen is pumped away through the solid electrolyte.
Electronics Electronics In contrast to the other ceramic exhaustgas sensors, the NOx sensor is equipped with evaluation electronics . It delivers via CAN bus the oxygen signal, the NOx signal, and in each case the status of these signals.
Incorporated in the evaluation electronics are a microcontroller, an ASIC  for operating the oxygen pump cell, and a high precision instrument amplifier for the very small NO signal currents.
Particulate sensor The emission regulations in the USA and in Europe necessitate the use of diesel particulate filters , which places more stringent demands on the monitoring of the functional capability of these particulate filters. The particulate sensors measure the soot emissions downstream of the particulate filter.
1 Exhaust gas, 2 Interdigital structure  with two comb shaped  electrodes, 3 Ceramic, 4 Insulation, 5 Heater element, 6 Platinum meander.
SAE1242 1D 6 5 2 U For evaluating the temperature measurement For evaluating the current measurement 1 3 3 4 4 4 4 IS UH
Design: Design The sensor element consists of an interdigital structure with two comb shaped platinum electrodes on a ceramic substrate with an integrated heater element, as is familiar from the l sensor . A platinum meander serves to measure the temperature of the sensor element.
Operating principle Operating principle The particulate sensor is a resistive sensor. A direct voltage of for example 60 V is applied at the interdigital structure with  initially very high electrical resistance. As a result of the field forces soot particles from the exhaust gas collect on the interdigital electrodes and form increasingly conductive soot paths between the two comb shaped structures. This produces a monotonously increasing current between the electrodes . A predefined current threshold value is reached after a certain collection time. This triggers regeneration, in which the initial state is re established when the sensor element is heated and the soot is burned off at temperatures above 600 degC.
The time between the start of measurement and the start of regeneration is defined as the trigger time. An integrated temperature measurement meander is used to control the temperature to ensure that a controlled regeneration of the sensor element takes place.
The particulate sensor element is, like that of the l sensor, installed in a sensor housing. Because particulate deposits on the sensor element are desired here, particular emphasis is placed on the design of the protective tube.
Electronics Electronics The particulate sensor, like the NOx sensor, is equipped with evaluation electronics. The latter supply the sensor current and the signal status via a CAN bus.
Hydrogen sensors The use of fuel cells in motor vehicles necessitates the incorporation of hydrogen sensors. This sensor system has two functions safety monitoring with leak detection . The most common measurement principles are described in descending frequency of use. For the most part different methods are combined to reduce crosssensitivity to other gases or to increase sensitivity and widen the measurement range .
Electrochemical measurement principle Electrochemical measurement principle In the case of amperometric measurement a constant voltage is applied to an electrolyte that conducts only protons .
Potentiometric measurement methods : utilize the potential difference between two electrodes. One electrode with a platinum or palladium catalyst is situated in the hydrogen environment, the other electrode is situated for example in air. According to the Nernst equation a potential difference develops . The potentiometric sensors are cross sensitive to carbon monoxide that covers the catalyst. The age quickly and have a high drift. The measurement range is between 100 ppm and 100 %.
diaphragm which should only admit hydrogen. The sensitive layer absorbs the hydrogen and induces the change in resistance, which is measured by a Wheatstone bridge.
A MOSFET the breakdown voltage decreases when hydrogen is adsorbed.
Catalytic measurement principle Catalytic measurement principle Heat is generated when adsorbed gases oxidize on the surface of a catalyst. In a pellistor a wire consisting of catalyst material exposed to the hydrogen is heated and as a result undergoes a change in resistance dependent on the hydrogen concentration, while the temperature and resistance of a reference wire remain unchanged. The resistors are integral parts of a Wheatstone bridge circuit, with which the change in resistance is measured and from this the hydrogen concentration is inferred.
The catalytic methods are cross sensitive to other oxidizable gases and require a minimum quantity of oxygen  as the oxidation partner; the measurement range therefore is between 1 % and 90 to 95 % hydrogen concentration.
________________________________ References for gas and concentration References for gas and concentration sensors sensors Nernstgleichung: Zeitschrift fur physikalische Chemie, IV. Volume Book 1, Verlag Wilhelm Engelmann, 1889, Published by W. Ostwald, J. H. Van't Hoff, W. Nernst: Die elektromotorische Wirksamkeit der Ionen.
measurement principle  of a hydrogen sensor 1 Gas filtering diaphragm, 2 Sensitive layer,  3 Semiconductor metal oxide film, 4 Insulating layer,  5 Heater, 6 Substrate .
When photons strike atoms, they can each release an electron from the outer electron shell if the energy is sufficient. The energy required for release corresponds to the difference between the energy level EV of the valence band of the atom and the level EL of the conduction band, i. e. the band gap Eg.
at room temperature. Without special measures the charge carrier pairs created recombine already after a short time. However, the radiation created in the process is not in the visible range in the case of silicon.
In highly doped semiconductors, the above mentioned intrinsic photoelectric effect is supplemented by the extrinsic photoelectric effect. Because the energy gap to be overcome is significantly lower in such extrinsic sensors, they are also suitable for radiating a larger wavelength .
Semiconductor Semiconductor pn pn junctions junctions There is essentially no difference between a photocell, a photodiode, and a phototransistor. They all use the photocurrent or no load voltage in illuminated pn pn semiconductor contacts as the measuring effect. The elements differ, however, in the way they operate.
electron hole pairs in a planar semiconductor component with pn junction 1 Optical coating, 2 Contact, 3 SiO2, 4 Metal contact, 5 Space charge region.
tration, as a result of which the charge : carriers are immediately split after they have been created . Their recombination is practically prevented and photosensitivity is significantly increased.
Photocells Photocells are operated without external bias and can be operated both at no load  and in a short circuit. They have accordingly a low background noise and thus a high detection capability.
e U ___ k T  IS Iph where e Elementary charge, k Boltzmann's constant, T Absolute temperature.
for a phototransistor for constant  illuminance E 20 30 10 1,000 lx 300 lx 100 lx 0 V mA 0.01 0.1 1 Collector current IC Collector emitter voltage UCE UAN0177 1E UAN0178E
reverse voltage. This reduces the junction : capacitance in such a way that the cutoff frequency of such a photodiode is typically a few MHz.
In the case of the phototransistor shown in Figure 4 . However, the higher sensitivity comes at the  expense of a slightly worse frequency  dynamic and a slightly worse thermal characteristic.
Application Dirt sensor Dirt sensor The sensor measures the level of contamination on the headlamp lens to furnish the data required for automatic lens cleaning systems.
The sensor's photoelectric reflectedlight barrier consists of a light source , but not directly in the headlamp beam path. When the lens is clean, or covered with rain droplets, the infrared measurement beam emitted by the unit passes through the lens without being obstructed. Only a minuscule part is reflected back to the light receiver. However, if it encounters dirt particles on the outer surface of the lens, it is reflected back to the receiver at an intensity that is proportional to the degree of contamination and automatically activates the headlamp washer unit once a defined level is reached.
Rain sensor Rain sensor The rain sensor recognizes rain droplets on the windshield, so that the windshield wipers can be triggered automatically. The driver, however, can still use the manual controls.
The sensor consists of an optical transmission and reception path . When water droplets are present on the outer surface, a substantial amount of the light is refracted outward, thus weakening the return signal. The windshield wiper also responds to dirt once the activation threshold is exceeded.
History: In car entertainment had already been available in the 1920s with the first car radio in the legendary Ford Model T. In 1933 the Berlin based Radiotelefon und Apparatefabrik Ideal AG, a subsidiary of Bosch, brought out a car radio for the mediumand long wave ranges VHF reception first became available only in 1949 with five electron tubes. This appliance was developed together with Bosch. Station tuning was at that time performed with Bowden cables from the steering column; only later were all the components integrated in the instrument panel. The volume comprised around ten liters.
Enhanced comfort arrived in the 1950s with automatic station search and pushbuttons for storing several stations. Appliances became more compact with the introduction of transistor technology. In 1968 the first car radios with integrated cassette players came out. This made individual in car entertainment possible.
In 1974 the Autofahrer Rundfunk Informationssystem , a radio traffic information system for drivers, was launched in Germany. This enabled traffic information to be automatically detected on the car radio.
In the mid 1980s the first car radios with an integrated CD player were introduced, delivering bettering sound quality than the cassette player.
In 1988 the Radio Data System , the RDS traffic reports could also be shown independently of the received radio program in the car radio's display.
In the 1990s navigation devices found their way into cars, giving rise to combinations of car radio, CD player, and navigation systems.
DAE1416E Head up Display Operating system Instrument cluster Occupant display Front passenger display Central display Digital instrument cluster
more than just a radio. Integrated in these systems are entertainment components, intelligent vehicle navigation, telematics, and driver assistance systems. Connectivity with the Internet and the vehicle bus system facilitates communication between driver, vehicle, and outside world. Intuitive operation minimizes driver distraction, making driving safer. The HMI as the interface between human and machine is optimized here for distraction free driving.
Such systems in the meantime have become standard features in motor vehicles. The car radio and the navigation system are integrated in the central display in the center console and controlled via the touchscreen. Speedometer, rev counter, coolant temperature, and further information such as for example navigation system route direction symbols are displayed in the instrument cluster.
With a fully digital instrument cluster the electromechanical indicating instruments for engine speed, torque and coolant temperature are rendered superfluous. The indicating instruments are reproduced electronically.
In the additional front passenger display the front passenger can for example watch a video or surf the Internet without the driver being distracted.
Solutions for the future The demands imposed on the vehicle cockpits of the future are high. As with the smartphone or other digital companions, car drivers expect the greatest possible connectivity, personalization and intuitive operation from their vehicles. Vehicle manufacturers must offer suitable solutions for different markets and vehicle segments and in the process expect the greatest possible flexibility with low costs. Information Domain Computer Information Domain Computer System overview The "Information Domain Computer" from Bosch is based on a modular platform concept and will fulfill all these requirements. It provides a consistent, networked user experience, satisfies the high safety requirements, and offers car makers a high degree of flexibility in the configuration of their solution.
At present, multiple ECUs control and regulate the different displays and other electronic cockpit functions in production vehicles. In future more and more functions will be merged in one single processor. The Information Domain Computer is based on a "System on a Chip"  with the main processor controlling all the functions on just one chip. All the displays in the vehicle can be activated by this Domain Computer. This reduces the complexity and the demand for additional ECUs in the cockpit. The computing functions of the previously separate domains of infotainment and Instrumentation as well as other functions are bundled on one processor. This saves costs, installation space, and weight and consumes less energy.
An ECU for the entire user interface the merging of the previously separate systems in the cockpit facilitates the synchronization of the infotainment system, the instrument cluster and other displays so that all the given information can be orchestrated, managed and displayed at any time in the entire vehicle. This is a prerequisite for a seamless, uniform design language and the possibility of always flexibly displaying information where the driver needs it. The complete system is updatable "over the air", i.e., the Information Domain Computer can be updated in real time.
The infotainment system integrates numerous functions such as the media player, radio reception, intelligent navigation, smartphone integration, voice recognition, and third party software.
The hypervisor enables the different operating systems for example for infotainment and driver information displays to be operated in separate virtual machines. Safety relevant functions from the domains of infotainment and instrument
cluster run on the AUTOSAR operating : system. Examples are the rearview camera and an oil level warning display, which must be immediately reliably available when the vehicle is started.
The system controller has a shorter boot time than the main processor itself and thus guarantees the immediate availability of all the safety relevant functions. Digital instrument cluster Digital instrument cluster As well as the classic instrument cluster displays, further functions such as climate control, driver assistance functions, and driver monitoring camera with their own operating systems can be optionally integrated. Thanks to the intelligent algorithms only such information that the driver needs depending on the situation is displayed in the digital instrument cluster. This reduces the risk of the driver being overwhelmed by the increasing amount of information from driver assistance functions. Displayed content can be flexibly adapted, reducing the degree of driver distraction and at the same time helping to improve road safety.
Because a lot of driver information is safety relevant, modern digital instrument clusters must offer adaptive concepts . Complex functionalities and technologies, such as for example the driver monitoring camera, can also be integrated in the instrument cluster.
Smartphone connection to the infotainment system Application Safely, comfortably and without distraction mySPIN is a platform independent solution from Bosch that is designed to let the user connect their smartphone easily to their car or motorcycle. In this way, selected apps and networked services are displayed in a driverand rider friendly format in the vehicle's cluster.
Once the smartphone is connected to the vehicle via WLAN, Bluetooth or USB, many interesting apps and important smartphone functions  are available to the driver or rider in the vehicle display. The user has access to their smartphone at all times during their journey. mySPIN offers comfortable use of apps both in passenger cars and on motorcycles or two wheelers of any kind. Whether iOS or Android, once connected to the vehicle, the driver or rider can use compatible smartphone apps directly via the touchscreen on a motorcycle quite easily via the handlebar control unit. So as not to distract the driver or rider from the surrounding traffic and to provide driverand rider friendly and safe operation, all apps have been specially adapted to mobile use and exclusively make available all the important basic functions and information.
mySPIN already today offers the user an impressive selection of popular apps from a wide variety of categories, including navigation, point of interest and events, parking search, news, and music streaming. The pool of mySPIN compatible apps that provide international as well as local content for regions like Europe, America, India, and China is growing continuously.
mySPIN offers the automobile manufac : turers a great many interesting options too, including a seamless integration of the application in the vehicle's user interface and the facility to process vehicle data such as for example the current fuel level.
On top of this come specially developed applications with which the driver or rider can trace and share their routes with their community or download routes shared with the community. The make navigation functions and the latest traffic information available. The pool of apps is being continuously extended nationally and internationally. Developers not only customize already existing apps for mySPIN, but also widen the app pool with new innovative ideas.
Interaction channels: Drivers have to process a constantly increasing stream of information originating from their own and other vehicles, from the road, and from telecommunication equipment. All this information must be conveyed to drivers on suitable display and indicating equipment that complies with ergonomic requirements.
their suspected behavior, the lane, and objects in the road area are detected with the human being's sight apparatus and their subsequent highly powerful image processing and interpretation, selected and evaluated by further structures in the brain with regard to their development and relevance. Road traffic infrastructure makes demands on above all the visual channel: Road signs communicate rules, markings delimit lanes from each other, direction indicator lamps indicate a change of driving direction, stop lamps warn against vehicles that are slowing down. The visual channel is therefore extremely important to the driving environment. This applies to conscious vision, whereby the driver turns their eyes specifically to objects and focuses on them, but also to peripheral vision, which is crucial to positioning the vehicle within the lane. For this reason, additional glances at displays in the vehicle during interaction with driver information and driver assistance systems or their monitoring must be carefully assessed as to possible effects on road safety.
Acoustic channel speaking and hearing For communication with other road users, particularly the display and signaling of danger, the acoustic channel is used by human beings and by driver assistance systems. In the driver's own vehicle this channel is also used to input commands via speech input systems and to output warnings and information from the driver assistance system to the driver with acoustic signals and speech output.
The input of voice commands does not require the driver to turn their eyes, but does take up the driver's attention. Hearing does not require the driver to turn their eyes, but can convey spatial and complex information poorly. Even drivers who do not have an adequate sense of hearing must be able to communicate with the driver assistance system.
Transmitter Receiver Vehicle Display Image processing Speech, noise Speech recognition Notch settings, stops, return forces Operating elements, keypad, steering wheel, pedals Transmitter Receiver Visual channel Interaction, dialog Acoustic channel Haptic channel UAE1114 2E
Haptic and kinesthetic channels : operation and feeling The haptic channel provides feedback to the driver in the case of all motor operations when switches are operated and during steering and braking. Warning the driver by tightening their seat belt briefly and by vibrating the seat in the event of an imminent departure from the present lane has already been introduced in series production. A further possibility for arousing the driver's attention is the vibration of the steering wheel. Increased resistance on the accelerator pedal can support a speed recommendation and heightens the driver's attention. A torque that the driver can feel can be exerted on the steering wheel to suggest an evasive maneuver.
Even the kinesthetic channel, which helps the driver to perceive instances of acceleration while driving, is already in use in production vehicles for the purpose of arousing the driver's attention, for instance by way of a short braking jolt. The haptic channel is however continuously required for steering and cruise control, and additional manual operations  may impair lateral guidance by distracting the driver.
Instrumentation Information and communication areas In any vehicle, there are four information and communication areas which must satisfy different requirements in terms of their display features: the instrument cluster, the windshield, the center console, and the rear cabin.
The supply of available information and the necessary, advisable or desirable information for the respective occupant determine which communication areas are used in the case. Dynamic information , the preferred place to arrange the control units is in the primary reach area in the form of a rotary/push control element on the transmission hump.
Information of an entertainment nature is featured in the vehicle rear compartment, away from the primary field of vision. This is also the ideal location for a mobile office. The backrest of the front passenger seat is a suitable installation location for the monitor and operator unit of a laptop computer. "Dual View" or "Split View" displays for the center console have additionally been available since 2009; these displays can show different information to driver and passenger so that the passenger can, for example, watch videos without distracting the driver while the driver sees the navigation system information.
Instrument clusters: Earlier single instruments for the optical output of information .
instrument cluster and monitor in the center console area  Two freely programmed liquid crystal displays.
1 Indicator lamp .
Digital displays: Digital displays The digital instruments fitted up to the 1990s  technology, but they have now largely disappeared in Europe. This unfortunately means that the advantage of a demonstrably fast and accurate speed reading has been lost. Today's Formula 1 cars all have digital speedometers.
Digital displays in instrument clusters can be found today in Japan . Where for a long time only monochrome LEDs in the colors yellow, orange and red were available, now blue and highly efficient white LEDs are available.
Color LCDs, on account of their very low transmission .
The graphics module in the instrument cluster mainly enables an indication of driver related functions such as, for example, service intervals, check functions covering the vehicle's operating state, as well as vehicle diagnostics as needed by a workshop. They can naturally also show route direction information from the navigation system, where, due to the small surface area of these modules, digitized map excerpts must be missed out so that only route direction symbols such as turnoff instructions or intersection symbols appear in the display. This limitation has also been retained in newer vehicles. The initially monochrome modules were quickly followed in higher specification vehicles by color displays which can be read more quickly and accurately because of their color resolution.
Since 2005 active matrix displays in the display or drivers who are familiar with digital media can program their instrument clusters themselves. This option is offered in the Chevrolet Corvette C7.
In view of the drop in prices of these displays it can be assumed that the digital display in the instrument cluster will become widely accepted because in this way the variety of versions of entire vehicle model series can be reduced to a single, flexibly programmable unit, resulting in huge logistical savings.
The introduction of the graphics monitor : as the instrument cluster was also accompanied by a growth in the format of the center console display.
Central display and operating unit in the center console area The arrival of driver information systems, initially mainly navigation and telephone, saw the establishment of a further monitor with accompanying operating elements in the center console . In this connection, most German automobile manufacturers have replaced the button input on the monitor edge with a combined rotary/ push input button in the driver's primary area of reach on the center console. Operation directly via the display is possible with touch screens.
A wealth of information is shown on this central monitor, e.g., navigation, communication can also be usefully displayed here. The important issue for all visual displays is that they can be easily read within the driver's primary field of vision or its immediate vicinity so as to ensure that the driver does not have to look away from the road for long periods. Positioning this terminal, which is of universal use to driver and passenger, in the upper center console area is effective and necessary from both ergonomic and technical standpoints. The demands placed by TV reproduction and the navigation system on the video and map display determine the demands placed on the resolution and the color reproduction of the monitor. For this central display monitor, there has initially been a change from a small 6" monitor with a 4:3 aspect ratio to a wider format with a 16:9 aspect ratio, which allows additional route direction symbols to be displayed as well as the map. Newer vehicles with the central monitor located in the upper center console area sometimes have, due to the greater space available, much larger monitor formats. The Tesla Model S even uses a vertically arranged monitor with a diagonal of 17" as a combined display and operating unit in the center console.
Display types: Liquid crystal display The most display most commonly used today in vehicles is the liquid crystal display . The cell becomes non transparent, i.e., it is a light valve.
The operating range is 40 to 125 degC. The switching times are slightly longer at low temperatures due to the viscous properties of the liquid crystal material. Depending on the choice of polarization direction of the externally applied polarizer film, the TN LCD can be operated in positive contrast . The TN LCD is usually operated in negative contrast in the vehicle since this comes close to the familiar appearance of printed dials. Negative contrast cells always required backlighting.
Separately controlled segment areas can be used to portray numbers, letters, and symbols. TN technology is suitable not only for smaller display modules but also for larger display areas and modular LCD instrument clusters such as the instrument cluster in the Audi Quattro model year 1984.
Active matrix LCD Active matrix LCD Dot matrix displays with graphics capabilities are needed to display infinitely variable information. The task of the visually sophisticated and rapidly changing display of complex information in the area of the instrument cluster and the center console with high resolution liquid crystal monitors with video capabilities can only be performed effectively by an active matrix liquid LCD consist of the "active" glass substrate with the semiconductor structures and the opposing plate with the color filter structures. The active substrate accommodates the pixel electrodes made from indium tin oxide, the metallic row and column conductors, and semiconductor structures. At each intersecting point of the row and column conductors, there is a thin film field effect transistor, which is etched in several masking steps from a previously applied sequence of layers. A capacitor is generated at each pixel as well.
applied either in the form of continuous : strips .
Organic light emitting diodes The luminescence excitation for organic, electroluminescent display units .
matrix display. The organic layer is located between the row and column electrodes arranged perpendicularly to each other. Multi color reproduction is achieved by OLED materials in a dot matrix that emit different colors.
element 1 Metal cathode .
1 Substrate made of glass or  flexible plastic foil , 2 Anode strip, 3 Organic layer system, 4 Cathode strip, 5 Pixels.
1 Color filter , 2 Counter electrode, 3 Glass substrate, 4 Column conductor, 5 Pixel electrodes, 6 Row conductor, 7 Thin film field effect transistor, 8 Black matrix structure.
displaying air conditioner functions. The : option to construct OLEDs with curved surfaces using plastic substrates could attract interest in the future from the standpoint of providing good anti reflection conditions in a vehicle.
Head up display Conventional instrument clusters are situated at a viewing distance of 0.8 to 1.2 m. In order to read information in the area of the instrument cluster, the driver must adjust his or her eyes from long distance  were first used in military aviation applications. For motor vehicle applications they were available in a simple design, usually as a digital speedometer, in parallel with the analog speedometer in Japan and in the USA as an optional extra. An improved form was initially used in the USA and later also in European vehicles.
The image of a head up display is projected with the aid of the windshield into the driver's primary field of vision. The optical system generates a virtual image at such a viewing distance that the human eye can remain adjusted to long distance. Head up displays do not require the driver to divert their eyes from the road thus allowing the driver to register at all times safety critical driving situations without being distracted. The driver does not need to look at the instrument cluster when important information is shown in the head up display.
Design Design A typical head up display features an activated display module for generating the image, a lighting facility, an optical imaging unit, and a combiner, which reflects the image to the driver's eyes. In a motor vehicle it is usually the windshield which acts as the combiner. To avoid double images caused by reflections on the inner and outer boundary surfaces the windshield is slightly wedge shaped in design. From the driver's perspective the two images created at the boundary surfaces then coincide.
A real image is created in the display module. This module can be a display or a back projection onto a diffusing surface, e.g., with a scanning laser beam. This real image is only roughly 20 x 40 mm in size, but the luminance required for good readability in daylight is more than 50,000 cd/m2, i.e., 100 times more than a conventional direct view display. This image is reflected through the windshield into the driver's eyes. For the driver this virtual image of the driving situation in front of the vehicle is superimposed.
Particularly high contrast segment TN LCDs can be used as the display for monochrome head up displays with modest levels of information content. More sophisticated, multicolor displays use polysilicon technology AMLCDs.
displaying navigation notices .
Augmented reality head up display Augmented reality head up display "Augmented reality" head up displays offer an even greater benefit than showing information in the head up display without local reference to the environment. They are called "augmented reality displays" in the English speaking world. They require a greater level of technical sophistication in realizing the projection unit by using a laser or a DLP module to generate the image. DLP stands for "Digital Light Projection", the generation of images by micromechanical elements, as are also used in projectors.
Augmented reality head up displays are characterized by a larger projection field. This enables the system to display the warning of an obstacle in the driver's field of vision and at the virtual distance in which it is located in nature. To enable the information to be read without parallax, however, a position correction depending on the position of the driver's head is required. With this system, route direction information can be displayed for example at an intersection precisely where the junction suggested by the navigation system is situated; at an expressway/highway exit the arrow for recommending the exit can be positioned on the deceleration lane . Touchscreen The infotainment system display is a touch sensitive screen . Most of the functions of for example the radio, the navigation system or the smartphone paired by Bluetooth with the infotainment system can be operated by tapping the display with a finger.
Voice control: Voice input can be used to enter addresses in the navigation system or enter contacts that the user wishes to call on the smartphone paired with the infotainment system. Modern in car voice control systems have taken a tremendous technological step forward in recent years thanks to the integration of artificial intelligence, "natural language understanding" , and "cognitive computing". Communication between driver and system is becoming more natural and speech recognition capabilities have improved, even when it comes to understanding regional accents. Conventional speech recognition systems, like the ones in smartphones, always require a fast data connection to process voice commands. Speech is recorded and then transmitted to an external computer system for analysis. This method is only of limited use for in car applications. After all, a fast data connection is not always available out on the road. Speech recognition must for this reason function without dependence on an external data connection. The on board infotainment system handles all the computing operations. The voice thus remains a reliable means of control, even in tunnels or in well developed areas with adequate cellular coverage.
Wireless signal transmission: Wireless transmission technology permits the simultaneous broadcasting of information to large populations. It is also of major significance to mobile radio reception as used in motor vehicles. At present, the importance of digital transmission methods is growing. The wireless section of the transmission chain also uses analog signal transmission, so the two technologies are basically identical.
Radio and TV broadcasting Wireless radio and TV broadcasting is primarily used for terrestrial transmissions. In the case of analog radio broadcasting, the audio signal is modulated on the high frequency signal. In the receiver, the received high frequency signal is then converted to the baseband frequency and demodulated. The final signal obtained in this way is identical to the useful signal.
bands is subject to legal control .
Information transmission using  high frequency waves The variation in a high frequency signal used to transmit a useful signal from a transmitter to a receiver is called modulation. The modulated high frequency signal is emitted within a precisely determined, narrowly defined frequency band by an antenna. The receiver selects precisely that frequency band from the large number of frequencies received by the antenna. In this way, wave propagation between transmitter and receiver is a link within the signal transmission chain. For example, when it comes to the transmission of an audio signal, the useful signal in contrast to the high frequency carrier signal is made up of various frequencies ranging up to a maximum of 20 kHz. The high frequency carrier is modulated with this low frequency signal. A transmitter antenna beams out the carrier wave.
Wavebands Wavelengths l in m Frequencies f in MHz Examples Long wave Radio and TV reception in motor vehicles
The maximum distance at which the sig : nal can still be received and the reception quality depend on the frequency, among other things. Short wave and long wave have very long ranges, in some cases intercontinental, whereas the reception range of VHF transmissions is hardly any further than the line of sight.
The receiver station demodulates the signal. The resulting low frequency electrical oscillation is then converted by a loudspeaker into acoustic oscillations. Amplitude modulation Amplitude modulation Amplitude modulation .
Frequency modulation Frequency modulation Frequency modulation .
Frequency modulation is used for FM radio and the sound channel of analog TV transmissions, for example. The transmissions of frequency modulated signals are impaired by amplitude modulation interference to a lesser degree than the transmissions of amplitude modulation transmitters.
Digital modulation processes Digital modulation processes In the case of digital modulation processes, the amplitude or the frequency of the carrier is discretely altered. One or more bits can thus be allocated to each of these carrier states so as to enable digital information to be transmitted. Reception problems VHF signals have virtually a linear propagation. As a result, a car radio may lose the signal from a VHF transmitter that is only 30 km away if there is high ground between the car and the transmitter. On the other hand, reception may be unimpaired at a location further away if there is a clear "line of sight" between the car and the transmitter. Such "radio shadows" are thus often covered by a fill in transmitter. Signals may be reflected off the sides of valleys or high rise buildings. The reflected signals then arrive at the receiving antenna with a time delay and are superimposed on the signals received directly from the transmitter. This produces what is known as "multi channel reception". It causes multipath interference and results in the deterioration of sound quality in radio reception.
a) Low frequency oscillation at amplitude AN and frequency fN, b) Unmodulated high frequency oscillation, c) Modulated high frequency oscillation. Time a b c AN AH Amplitudes Amplitudes Time a b c UKR0005 2E UKR0005 3E
cles effectively. Interference free recep : tion is impossible if the signals received from the transmitter are too weak. Thus, reception of a previously perfectly interference free signal will break down suddenly when a car enters a tunnel, for example. This can be explained by the shielding effect of the reinforced concrete tunnel walls which reduce the useful field strength of the transmitter signal to which the radio is tuned. At the same time, the interference field strength remains the same. Under certain conditions, it may not be possible at all to continue to receive the radio station signal. Similar phenomena can also be experienced when traveling in mountains, for example. Radio interference Radio interference is caused by undesirable high frequency waves which are directed together with the desired signal to the receiver. It occurs wherever electrical currents are suddenly interrupted or switched on. High frequency interference waves are thus produced, for example, by the ignition of a spark ignition engine, the actuation of a switch, or the switching operations on the commutator of an electric motor. Such rapid changes of current generate high frequency waves which interfere with radio reception by receivers located close by. The effect of the interference depends on the steepness of the signal pulse and its amplitude, among other things.
Radio interference caused by such steeply rising current pulses can be reduced or completely eliminated by EMC measures . Interference can travel to the receiver in different ways: directly through wires connecting the interference source and the receiver, or by wireless transmission of electromagnetic radiation, or by capacitive or inductive coupling. Strictly speaking, the last three options cannot be separated from one another.
Signal to noise ratio Reception quality depends on the strength of the electromagnetic field generated by the transmitter. This should be substantially greater than the strength of the interference field, i. e. the ratio between the strength of the transmitter signal and the strength of the interference field the signal to noise ratio should be as large as possible.
A receiver close to the interference source receives not only the useful signal from the desired transmitter, but also the undesired interference signal, if it is transmitted at the same frequency. Nevertheless, good quality reception is still possible provided that the field strength of the desired transmitter signal at the point of reception is very high in comparison with the strength of the electromagnetic field generated by the interference source. The useful field strength of the signal from the transmitter depends on transmitter power, transmitter frequency, the distance between the transmitter and the receiver, and the propagation characteristics of the electromagnetic waves. In the case of medium wave and long wave signals, the field strength of the transmitter signal can be weakened by difficult topology to such an extent that the signals of even powerful transmitters have low useful field strengths at some reception locations. VHF signals may be subject to heavy fluctuations in useful field strength under certain conditions. Receivers in motor vehicles may also suffer from relatively low useful voltages at the receiver input due to the short effective height of the antenna. Accordingly, the opportunities for improving the signal to noise ratio in the receiver are very limited.
By optimizing antenna positioning, the available useful voltage at the receiver input can be increased, thereby improving the signal to noise ratio, which is the decisive factor in reception quality. Frequently, however, a compromise is made between design considerations and technical demands. Another means of improving signal to noise ratio is by reducing the strength of the radiated interference signals.
Receiver design also has an impact on reception quality. In addition to metallic shielding, which prevents the direct entry of radiated interference, and filters on the power source input, some receivers have circuits fitted with automatic interference suppression .
Radio tuners: Radio tuners in motor vehicles are frequently called car radios or automotive sound systems. However, this term refers not only to a radio tuner but also to devices with a large number of integrated information and entertainment functions. These include, for instance, the analysis of supplementary information , as well as integrated radio communication interfaces, cellular phones and other devices.
In the past few years, conventional analog transmission technology has developed new systems. For this reason, modern car tuners are capable of receiving a wide variety of radio broadcast systems worldwide. As well as conventional radio broadcasting, these systems include among others DAB .
The conventional radio tuner is designed to receive analog FM and AM modulation and has an analog signal path from the  antenna to the audio signal. Modern car tuners with the highest received power, on the other hand, process signals digitally. The IF signal  supplied by the tuner is digitized by an analog digital converter, and then processed. In standards covering digital modulation essentially only demodulation in the digital part of the signal path changes. Conventional tuners Signal processing Signal processing The antenna, which is predominantly designed as a rod or window antenna, picks up the electromagnetic signal emitted by the transmitter. This consists of different channels with a fixed frequency spacing. The high frequency alternating voltage generated at the base of the antenna is routed to the receiver and processed there.
1 Antenna, 2 FM input stage, 3 AM input stage,  4 Mixer stage, 5 Voltage controlled oscillator , 9 Analog digital converter, 10 Demodulator and decoder, 11 Audio processing. fref Reference frequency.
AM input stage AM input stage A bandpass filter limits the amplitudemodulated signal in the LW, MW and SW bands, and the resulting signal is amplified in the following stage with low noise. FM input stage FM input stage The frequency modulated VHF signal is received by a separate input stage. The input filter is either tuned to the frequency to be received or configured to the entire received band. The received signal level is then adjusted to the desired input level for the following mixer stage with low noise by an automatically controlled amplifier.
Voltage controlled oscillator Voltage controlled oscillator The oscillator in the mixer stage. A quartz stabilized signal serves as reference frequency.
Mixer stage Mixer stage The mixer stage converts the input signal into a constant intermediate frequency. Different mixer stages are frequently used for receiving FM and AM signals. On the other hand, the principle of frequency conversion is the same.
IF filter and amplifier IF filter and amplifier The IF signal recovered in this way is then fed to an IF filter and a controlled amplifier.
Demodulator Demodulator The demodulator generates the digital audio signal from the digital IF signal. Decoder Decoder Additional information, such as RDS data , is decoded by the decoder and passed on to a processor for processing.
Audio processing Audio processing After demodulation, the audio signal may be adapted, for example, to the vehicle conditions and the listener's preferences. This can be achieved by using the appropriate controls to adjust tone and volume or to vary the level between front and rear or between left and right.
Digital receivers A digital receiver .
Digital equalizer Digital equalizer The digital equalizer consists of a multiband parametric equalizer which provides separate adjustment features for the mid frequency, and the amplification/attenuation of individual filters. The suppression of unwanted resonances thus obtained optimizes sound quality inside the vehicle. The frequency response of the speakers can also be linearized.
Preset equalizer filters can also be implemented in some devices. These can be activated according to music genre or vehicle type .
Digital Sound Adjustment : Digital Sound Adjustment "Digital Sound Adjustment" are used to pick up and analyze a test signal generated by the speakers. The optimum sound curve for the vehicle is then set on the equalizer.
Dynamic Noise Covering Dynamic Noise Covering While the vehicle is in motion, the "Dynamic Noise Covering" of the interference frequencies to maintain optimum reproduction of sound quality, regardless of driving noise.
Reception quality Analog radio broadcasting is primarily used for terrestrial transmissions. The transmission path is not always ideal, with the result that reception quality may be impaired, depending on the transmitter/receiver constellation and environmental conditions. In the case of VHF reception, reception locations may be critical because of the transmission path problems described below.
Fading Fading Fading is caused by fluctuations in signal reception level due to obstacles in the signal path, such as tunnels, high rise buildings, or mountains.
Multipath reception Multipath reception Multipath reception is caused by the reflection of signals off buildings, trees or water. This can easily lead to a substantial dip in reception field strength, and even total signal loss. The differences in the strength of the received signal field strength occur within a few centimeters of each other. Such fluctuation has a particularly detrimental effect on mobile receivers, such as car tuners.
Adjacent channel interference Adjacent channel interference Adjacent channel interference occurs when there is another channel received with a high field strength close to the channel received.
High level signal interference High level signal interference High level signal interference occurs close to the transmitter at high field strength. The receiver protects its input by reducing the field strength. This has the effect of attenuating the weaker signals from other transmitters, i. e. they become quieter.
Overmodulation Overmodulation Some transmitters increase the modulation level in order to achieve a greater range or higher loudness level. The disadvantages of this process are greater distortion factor and greater susceptibility to multipath interference.
Ignition interference Ignition interference High frequency interference sources  produce reception interference.
Reception improvement A large number of functions for improving received power are implemented in modern automotive sound systems. An overview of the most important functions is provided in the following.
Digital Directional Antenna: Digital Directional Antenna The "Digital Directional Antenna"  system developed by Bosch uses the signals from two antennas to calculate a synthetic antenna with a new directional characteristic. This permits suppression of interference caused by multipath reception as shown in Figure 4.
Digital Diversity System Digital Diversity System The reception characteristics of FM radio are heavily dependent on location. A Digital Diversity System has a number of antennas at its disposal so that it can switch between them in order to enhance reception. The Digital Diversity System integrated in the digital receiver uses exactly the same signal for its switching strategy and the signal is available as the audio signal after demodulation.
High cut High cut Interference caused by such effects as fading and multipath reception has a greater effect on higher audio frequencies. For this reason, modern automotive sound systems have a facility for detecting such interference and reducing the level of the audio signal at higher audio frequencies when there is interference. SHARX SHARX SHARX is a function which automatically adjusts the bandwidth of the intermediate frequency filter for FM reception to suit reception conditions. If different stations transmit at frequencies that are very close to one another, this function significantly increases the clarity of separation by reducing the bandwidth and allows virtually interference free reception. If there are no adjacent channels, the bandwidth can be increased and thus harmonic distortion reduced.
Automatic interference suppression Automatic interference suppression A further measure for improving reception is automatic interference suppression, which suppresses interference signals generated by interference sources from both the present vehicle and other vehicles. To this end, the demodulated signal, which contains interference pulses, as well as the useful signal, is blanked for that moment of interference and the gap created is filled.
Code Information transmitted PS Name of the station received AF List of alternative frequencies on which the station also broadcasts PI Identifies the broadcast station TP, TA Traffic program station identification, traffic announcement identification PTY Identification of the station type EON Signals traffic announcements  on a parallel station TMC Standardized traffic information CT Time 90deg 270deg 60deg 30deg 150deg 0deg 180deg 210deg 330deg 300deg 240deg 120deg 1 2 3 UKR016 1Y
Transmission paths: Traffic telematics refers to systems that transmit traffic related information to and from vehicles and, generally, which analyze this information automatically. Both unidirectional broadcasting and bidirectional mobile communications connections are available as transmission paths. Analog and digital radio provides only the path into the vehicle, with the information received identical for all  receivers. Mobile communications connections on the other hand enable messages to be specifically received by way of individual requests and thus information to be exchanged between a vehicle and appropriate service providers in both directions.
The transmission paths also differ in the bandwidth limiting the information volume that is available and the transmission costs. The available bandwidth in mobile communications has increased by several orders of magnitude with each generation in recent years through the developments of GPRS . While data transmission by radio does not involve additional costs for receiving sound radio, costs are generally incurred for the information volumes on the mobile communications channel in proportion to the data volume.
In the future communication with "roadside units" in accordance with the standard WLAN 802.11p will serve as a further transmission path providing a high bandwidth with no additional transmission costs.
Standardization The standardization of message content is an important precondition to enable the evaluation of information from various sources by different on board terminals.
RDS/TMC standard The widespread RDS/TMC standard  .
TPEG standard It is now also possible, via the TPEG standard , to transmit traffic forecasts and recommended alternative routes. A limitation by numeric, predefined junctions and road sections within the road network, as used in TMC, is no longer necessary when the AGORA C standard is used. This standard allows messages for any road to be coded without transmitters and receivers having to use identical version reference tables. However, because of the bandwidth required, transmission is only possible via digital channels. Traffic telematics
Information recording: The benefit of traffic telematics is dependent on the quality of the messages and how up to date they are. There are different data sources for recording information about traffic flow. "Historical" data are additionally used so as also to offer independently of current messages the best possible route planning.
Local information The first data sources for automatically determining the traffic situation were induction loops integrated in the road surfaces which can record the average speed and number of vehicles at individual road points and transmit the data to an evaluating control center. This form of recording was supplemented by the introduction of sensors on expressway bridges which also collect this information.
Area wide information In order to receive area wide information instead of local measurements, newer approaches resort to floating car data or floating phone data. The basic idea is to infer traffic situations from the movement data of many cars or mobile phones.
Floating car principle Floating car principle In the case of the floating car principle, the in car navigation device transmits the car's position and speed by mobile communications to a control center, which then calculates the current traffic situation by statistically analyzing these data. Floating phone principle Floating phone principle In the case of the floating phone principle, the movement patterns of mobile phones are analyzed. This principle exploits the fact that every mobile phone is constantly transmitting information on the current reception situation to its base station. Characteristic patterns can be derived from the changed messages which are accompanied by the mobile communication device's change of location. These patterns are then used to infer the position of the device. Statistical processes are used first to evaluate whether the devices in question are  moving devices in vehicles and then to infer the traffic situation from them. Benefits of the floating processes Benefits of the floating processes The two floating processes are used not only to detect the traffic disruption itself, but also to determine and forward reference values for the delay caused by the disruption.
The movement profiles of the vehicles can also be collected, assigned a time, and compressed. This practice produces so called hydrographs which reproduce for individual road sections the average driving speeds depending on the day of the week and the time of the day. In this way, recurring traffic disruptions such as slow moving traffic and regular rush hour traffic jams are depicted. The vehiclenavigation system can use these hydrographs as "historical" data as a function of the current time to specify a route and journey time adapted to the expected situation.
Dynamic route guidance Through the standardized coding of traffic messages, it is possible also to display these messages in the vehicle in comprehensible text form for the driver. Furthermore, the computers in routeguidance systems can determined on the basis of the standardized coding whether a better alternative route exists in the event of disruptions. The relevant messages are filtered out from those available using the vehicle location and, if necessary, its movement along a route. If the associated amount of time lost is communicated as well as the actual disruption, this time lost can also be included in the route computation. In the event of alternative route guidance, the driver is instructed that the route has been recalculated on account of traffic announcements received. Further route recommendations will follow in accordance with the new route .
Furthermore, subscription traffic services not only transmit the more serious traffic jams and disruptions, but also indicate for all higher road categories the
existence of restricted driving speeds : identifiable from the floating data. Thus, for example, the traffic situation can be made transparent by a color coded, high detail display of the traffic flows in the vehicle navigation's map display even when route guidance is inactive.
Vehicle vehicle communication Vehicle vehicle communication is currently being tested as the logical next step in traffic telematics. The ultimate aim is to further increase road safety and to reduce economic losses due to traffic disruptions. A system of direct information transfer between vehicles can be used to send warnings about, for example, broken down vehicles, approaching emergency vehicles, the location of the tail end of a jam, right through to relevant individual maneuvers such as hard braking. This gives the driver in the receiving vehicle time to react in an suitable way to the present situation.
The standard WLAN 802.11p serves as the basis for direct vehicle vehicle communication. The basic principle behind the warning functions is the timely and correct communication of precise location information between the transmitting vehicle and a receiving vehicle. This involves both the continuous transmission of movement messages and the additional transmission of an extra warning message when disruptions and events are detected. The process of regularly repeating or even passing on received messages to other vehicles ensures that all the affected vehicles can be reached.
To prepare for market launch, engineers are currently testing the functionality and efficacy of the systems under everyday conditions in a variety of field tests conducted in for example Germany and the USA.
Introduction : driver assistance Driver assistance systems in modern vehicles can basically be divided into the categories comfort/convenience systems and safety systems. Comfort/convenience systems relieve the driver in performing monotonous, repetitive driving tasks. Typical examples are automatic turn signal resetting after turning or Adaptive Cruise Control , there is increasingly a flowing transition between comfort/convenience and safety systems. For further details, refer to the descriptions in the section "Comfort/convenience and safety systems".
Critical driving situations Driver assistance systems aim to make the vehicle capable of perceiving its surroundings, interpret them, identify critical situations, and assist the driver in performing driving maneuvers. The aim is to identify critical situations early, i.e., already before they occur, and anticipate and defuse them, or at best to prevent accidents during critical situations or at worst to minimize as much as possible the consequences of an accident.
In critical driving situations, just fractions of a second are often decisive in determining whether an accident occurs or not. According to the study in , approximately 60 % of rear end collisions and approximately 30 % of frontal impacts could have been avoided if the driver had reacted only half a second earlier. Every second accident at an intersection could be prevented by faster and correct driver reaction.
At the end of the 1980s, when the possibility of highly efficient and partially automated road traffic was presented as part of the EU "Prometheus" project, the electronic components for this task were not in existence. The highly sensitive sensors and powerful microcomputers now available have brought such vehicles driven by highly automated means a step nearer to realization.
injury by accident type Remedy: ESC, lane departure warning 17 % rear ending accidents Remedy: Emergency braking systems 4 % pedestrian accidents Remedy: Pedestrian protection 6 % collision accidents Remedy: Overtaking assistant 4 % accidents driving in same direction when changing lane Remedy: Lane change assistant 15 % other car accidents 18 % accidents not involving a car
The first driver assistance systems which : facilitate semi automated vehicle guidance in specific traffic situations have been on the market since 2013 . All this is done at those crucial fractions of a second faster, since a computer controlled system can essentially react faster than a person.
Accident situation and actions Accident research plays a significant role in the development of driver assistance functions. Accident research at Bosch provides support among others in the design and development of new vehicle safety functions while taking into account current traffic accident occurrences. Assessments are conducted as to the effectiveness of these systems i.e., of the potential for accident avoidance and their effects on future accident occurrences.
Around 26 % of accidents involving personal injury in which a passenger car is involved occur during a turning or crossing maneuver. Here different intersection assistant functions will be able in future to reduce accidents.
Every tenth accident involving personal injury .
Accidents involving unprotected road users such as pedestrians or cyclists demonstrate a high degree of complexity. The first emergency braking pedestrian protection functions for passenger cars are already available on the market. These operate in up to 4 % of all accidents involving pedestrians. Research is currently being conducted into extending these pedestrian protection systems to further reduce the occurrence or the consequences of such an accident by means of automatic avoidance maneuvers.
Collision accidents which usually occur during overtaking and can be positively influenced by overtaking assistance systems amount to 6 %. An additional reduction in accidents by 2 % or in total 4 % can be expected when the driver is supported when changing lanes by an assistance system.
In spite of the already high traffic safety standards, according to the accident research conducted by Bosch up to 40 % of accidents involving personal injury and passenger cars still do not involve the operation of a vehicle safety system accident research is helping here to develop further vehicle safety functions or to advance their market acceptance.
Applications: Driver assistance systems have a wide range of applications. They can be divided into active systems which intervene in the driving dynamics and into passive system with no intervention in the driving dynamics.
As already mentioned, a further distinction is made between comfort/convenience systems to reduce the burden on the driver with the longterm goal of fully automated driving and safety systems with the aim of accident avoidance or mitigation of accident consequences.
Passive safety functions Passive safety functions Passive safety functions .
Driver support Driver support Systems for reducing the burden on the driver  aids the driver in looking for a parking space and actually parking, while specific infrared video sensors can be used to good effect to improve driver vision during nighttime driving. In the case of the lane departure warning system, a video camera uses the road markings to detect the direction of the lane ahead of the vehicle and warns the driver if he/she changes lane without activating a turn signal. The warning can be issued acoustically through the car radio's speakers or mechanically in the form of steering wheel vibrations.
UAE1224 4E Safety Comfort and convenience Active Passive Fully automated vehicle guidance Emergency avoidance Active safety functions Automated vehicle guidance Passive safety functions Driver support Intersection assistant Emergency braking Night vision systems Indicating parking assistant Lane departure warning Collision warning Passive pedestrian protection Intervening parking assistant ESC Prefill ACC Lanekeeping support Airbags Side view assistant Traffic jam assistant
stop, and then by moving it forward again at low driving speed .
Active safety functions Active safety functions The active safety functions  or a steering pulse. ESC is an example of an active safety system on the vehicle stabilization level.
Standard architecture for driver assistance systems Driver assistance systems can be subdivided in accordance with a distributed standard architecture , actuator technology, and human machine interaction.
The sensor layer consists of various sensors defined and designed in response to the functional requirements in type and parameterization. In the sensor data fusion module the environment is modeled in accordance with the function specification on the basis of the sensor measured values.
In the following situation analysis the criticality with regard to function relevant scenarios is checked on the basis of environment modeling. Thus, the position of the object and the actual position of the vehicle are predicted into the future by way of example for an emergency braking function and the risk of collision is evaluated.
situation and function, from early driver : notification and warning to an automated steering or braking intervention to avoid a collision or mitigate the consequences of an accident. The corresponding actuators and the human machine interface are now activated in accordance with the function specific warning cascade.
Typical approaches for the environment sensor system, sensor data fusion and function are described in more detail in the following on the basis of the standard architecture introduced.
Environment sensor system for electronic all around visibility Using "electronic all around visibility", numerous driver assistance systems are achievable both for passive and for active intervention purposes. Figure 4 shows the detection ranges of the allaround visibility sensors presented below. Long range Long range Mainly long range radar primarily in Japan. These sensors operating in the close infrared range have ranges of between 150 and 250 m.
The detection ranges shown as circle segments indicate the beam angle, however the sensor range decreases as the angles get bigger. 1 Long range radar up to 250 m, horizontal beam angle 30deg, 2 Front end mid range radar up to 160 m, horizontal beam angle 45deg, 3 Night vision camera up to 150 m, horizontal beam angle 32deg, 4 Video, stereo video up to 80 m, horizontal beam angle 41deg, 5 Ultrasonic sensors up to 5 m, horizontal beam angle in each case 120deg, 6 Rearview camera up to 15 m, horizontal beam angle 130deg, 7 Close range cameras up to 10 m, beam angle in each case 130deg, 8 Rear end mid range radar up to 100 m, horizontal beam angle 150deg. UAE0869 5Y 2 3 1 5 6 7 5 4 8
Close range: Close range Ultrasonic sensors with higher scanning ranges than previously can form a "virtual safety shield" around the vehicle within certain limits . This shield can be used to implement a number of functions. The signals from objects inside this safety shield serves as the database of various safety and comfort/convenience systems. Even the driver's "blind spot" can be monitored by these sensors.
Since 2008 multi beam lidar sensors have been used to monitor the range up to 8 m ahead of the front of the vehicle for automatic emergency braking functions and have been rapidly taking hold in the volume segment.
Ultra close range Ultra close range The parking assistant monitors the ultra close range with the aid of ultrasound technology. Today's sensors have a range of up to 5 m. These sensors are therefore suitable for a variety of parking functions. Rearend video sensors  can assist the ultrasound based ParkPilot system during parking maneuvers.
Sensor data fusion In the event of long range functional requirements a number of sensors . Thus, the camera mounted at the front end can, depending on its functionality, also be used to extend the measured values of the long range radar. This enables not only the distance to an object to be measured, but also the object itself to be classified. The object class enables the system to draw conclusions about the position and nature of future object movement and thereby helps to increase the reliability of the function. Connecting the video system to the longrange radar creates synergy effects. This significantly increases the beam angle of the ACC system or lane keeping support and makes object detection even faster and more reliable.
Future driver assistance systems will incorporate a large number of environment sensors. Because the sensor data typically arrive at different frequencies and asynchronously and are subject to different time delays, a common time allocation must first be established in the fusion module. This is achieved typically using ring memory structures and time stamps. The vehicle's surroundings are modeled on the basis of the sensor data. Grid approaches are increasingly being used to model the non moving surroundings .
Test and hedging The primary motivation behind active intervention systems is increasing driving safety, as is the aim for example with an emergency braking system for automatic collision avoidance.
An important aspect of such systems is the risk of incorrect automatic interventions, for example an unauthorized emergency brake deployment. In the worst case this could result in accidents and consequently the increase in system safety would be undermined. It must therefore be possible through suitable measures to rule out such unauthorized interventions with absolute reliability.
In order to determine the achievable benefit and rule out potential risks, comprehensive tests are therefore part and parcel of the development of new driver assistance systems. How such tests are conducted and the complexity of such tests currently differ depending on whether the purpose is to test the aimed for effectiveness in critical driving situations or the hedging against unauthorized interventions.
Because critical driving situations, e.g., the rear end collisions addressed by AEB, fortunately only occur very rarely in ordinary road traffic, the effectiveness is instead analyzed without endangering
In contrast to these benefit cases, whose parameters can generally be well described from an accident analysis, the hedging against unauthorized interventions must essentially be conducted for all relevant ambient conditions and driving situations. For this reason, the vehicle manufacturers and system suppliers conduct very extensive vehicle tests for the purpose of releasing the system .
The main reason for the extensive endurance tests lies in the complexity of the environment sensors used, the wide variety of traffic situations, and the high requirements imposed on the safety of autonomous driving dynamics interventions. This is because, even in a driving situation that is non critical for the human driver, "phantom" objects may be detected . Because unauthorized braking or steering interventions involve a high risk potential, it is essential to ensure that even very rare cases of such incorrect deployments are discovered before the release of the system. This is the reason for the extensive driving tests.
________________________________ References References K. Enke: Possibilities for Improving Safety within the Driver Vehicle Environment Loop; 7th International Technical Conference on Experimental Safety Vehicle, Paris .
 C. Coue et al.: Bayesian Occupancy Filtering for Multitarget Tracking: an Automotive Application. The International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 19 30. HAL archives ouvertes, 2006.
 Y. Bar Shalom et al.: Estimation with Applications to Tracking and Navigation: Theory Algorithms and Software. Wiley & Sons, New York 2001.
Ultrasonic sensor: Application Today's parking aid and maneuvering systems . Sound or even visual alerts are issued to the driver as the vehicle approaches an obstacle.
The sixth generation ultrasonic sensor from Bosch is characterized by digital signal processing, which prevents the systems of different vehicles from influencing each other, and by blindness detection .
Sixth generation ultrasonic sensors also support emergency braking functions at low speed by detecting the presence of very near objects and reacting quickly to suddenly appearing obstacles .
1 Parked vehicles, 2 Parking vehicle, 3 Detection range of the ultrasonic sensors in the front area, 4 Detection range of the ultrasonic sensors in the rear area. 1 1 2 4 3 3 UKD0073 3Y
Ultrasonic sensor operating  principle The ultrasonic sensor receives a digital transmit pulse from the ECU the parking aid for example. The transmit electronics then induce the aluminum diaphragm to oscillate with square wave pulses of approximately 300 us duration at resonant frequency .
Ultrasonic sensors usually have for the described application a selective emission characteristic .
sensor 1 Piezoceramic element, 2 Decoupling ring, 3 Plastic case with plug connector, 4 Printed circuit board with transmit  and evaluation electronics, 5 Transformer, 6 Bond wire, 7 Aluminum diaphragm.
ment with ultrasound  Setup: ultrasonic pulse is output by  the emitter, reflected by the obstacle  and picked up by the receiver.
Application: Radar technology has since 1999 been used with increasing regularity in motor vehicles and supports drivers in their driving tasks. The radar sensor detects objects in front of the driver's vehicle and measures their distances, relative speeds and transverse offset to the driver's vehicle. On the road to autonomous driving the radar sensor thus makes a significant contribution to sensing and interpreting the surroundings and the driving situation.
In the early days the radar sensor was used primarily for adaptive cruise control .
The radar sensor's strengths lie primarily in its fast, precise, and weather independent measurement of distance and relative speed, as a result of which it is particularly suitable for active and passive safety functions. These are for example the Predictive Emergency Braking Systems , pre crash detection, lane change assistant, and blind spot monitoring. The radar sensor is, aside from the video sensor system, one of the cornerstones of vehicle environment sensing on the road to autonomous driving.
, 4 Heating conducting plate, 5 Housing with pressure equalization element and pins for electrical connection from p.c.b. to vehicle connector.
Radar principle: Sensing of objects The electromagnetic waves emitted by the radar device are rebounded against metal surfaces or other less well reflecting materials and are picked up again by the radar's receiving section. The radial distance from the radar sensor to the objects in the sensing range can be measured from the propagation times of these waves. The Doppler shift of the reflected electromagnetic waves enables the radial relative speed of all the detected objects to be measured directly. The spatial position is determined with the radial distance and one or more angle estimations based on the evaluation of three or more sending and receiving antennas.
Typical objects in the vehicle surroundings generate for the most part a number of reflexes, which depending on the configuration of the radar sensor are also measured separately. The upshot of this is that in the real environment for each measurement cycle several hundred reflexes are detected and forwarded for interpretation to the higher system layers. Measured variables in the system of vehicle coordinates All measured variables are converted to the system of perpendicular and cartesian vehicle coordinates. This is defined according to ISO 8855 as follows: The coordinate datum is usually at the vehicle's center of gravity; the x axis runs horizontally along the vehicle longitudinal axis and points forwards; the y axis is vertical to this and points horizontally to the left; the z axis points upwards on a wafer also permits further high integration for example for signal processing in the same IC.
Future development: Future development The increasing reduction of the structure sizes for the pure CMOS processes, which is driven in particular by smartphones, servers, and desktop computers, in the meantime enables the frequencies around 77 GHz to be generated with sufficient efficiency without using SiGe structures. Added to this is the ever more pronounced penetration of the automobile market by radar sensors and the accompanying massive increase in numbers.
This now permits the use of the high onetime costs of manufacturing 28 nm, 22 nm or even 16 nm structures for the radarsensor semiconductors in the automotive sector. The trend towards high integration is thus continued and the future will in part belong to the "single chip radar" MMIC together with signal processing and large computer components in an RFCMOS IC .
Measurement methods The received signals are compared with the transmitted signal. Due to the propagation time of the radar waves the received signals are a superposition of the reflected transmitted signals per object and noise created in the reception path. The reflected waves per object are delayed on account of the propagation time and shifted in frequency via the Doppler effect. The transmitted waves are modulated to enable a received signal to be uniquely assigned to a transmitted signal. Whereas previously pulse modulation was used with pulses of a magnitude of 0.5 to 20 ns , which during transmission alters the instantaneous frequency of the waves over time and requires less hardware outlay.
SiGe MMIC: mm wave IC, integrated circuit . UAE1212E Antenna system: transmitting and receiving antennas Flash RAM mC CAN controller FlexRay controller Vehicle plug Dual core Power supply CAN driver System ASIC Random/ lens heating Safety controller SiGe MMICs FlexRay Heater GND n.c.
CAN1 H CAN1 L Radar ASIC CLK Preamplifier Frequency control PLL A/D converter Sequence control UBatt 77 GHz VCO Reception mixer
est occurring frequency depends on the : maximum propagation time of the signals and the gradient of the frequency ramp. The signals are amplified, digitized, and to determine the frequencies subjected to a high speed Fourier analysis .
Frequency generation The operating principle of frequency generation is explained in the following. The frequency of the 77 GHz VCO is compared continually by PLL closed loop control . The mean transmit frequency is f0.
ment with a linear FMCW radar 1 Transmit frequency fS,  2 Receive frequency fE without relative speed, 3 Receive frequency fE with relative speed. fFMCW Frequency difference between transmitted and received radar signals, f1  Frequency difference on the rising ramp with relative speed, f2  Frequency difference on the falling ramp with relative speed, fD  Change of receive frequency with relative speed.
The fast Fourier transform of the received signals of a ramp produces a discrete frequency spectrum whose frequency cells can be assigned to a distance.
The Doppler effect is then evaluated by evaluating each distance cell across all ramps, again with fast Fourier transforms. This corresponds to a sampling of the Doppler effect, the individual ramps defined the sampling times and influence the determination of the Doppler frequency. Accordingly the acquired signals are evaluated with a two dimensional Fourier transform, with the time signal as the matrix of the dimension  and relative speed of the object. Figure 5 shows a sequence of FMCW ramps, Figure 6 a two dimensional spectrum with an object.
Advantages and disadvantages The major advantage of this method is the higher number of simultaneously detectable objects and the simpler allocation of distance and relative speed via the two frequencies.
The major disadvantage is the substantial increase in outlay. For the above example due to the Nyquist condition an A/D converter sampling rate of at least 40 MHz is required, 51.2 MHz produces for a ramp duration of 10 us exactly 512 sampling values. To achieve suitable Doppler acquisition and a higher signalto noise ratio, it is necessary to evaluate for example 128 ramps compared with two ramps a data volume that is higher by a factor of 64. For this reason, hardware units are usually used with calculate the Fourier transforms very quickly and with little power loss.
Antenna system and determining the angle The antenna system has not only to transmit and receive the highfrequency signals, but also to determine the spatial position of the objects. This is required to assign the objects to lanes and to determine object characteristics.
Determining the relative position : Determining the relative position of the objects of the objects Radar systems determine the relative position by estimating the angle under which the receiving antenna locates an object. Two, or better still more than two receiving antennas are required for this purpose. This can be done by directing a single radar beam which are measured for an object in neighboring beams allow a conclusion to be drawn about the relative reception angle to the radar sensor axis. In practice four radar beams are frequently used, enabling an angle accuracy of up to 0.1deg and a separability of up to 3deg to be achieved.
Patch array antenna system Patch array antenna system There are many ways of technically realizing the antenna system. The most common variant is the patch array antenna system with antenna elements which are realized in microstrip technology.
Design The patch array antenna system, in contrast to the lens antenna system, as a rule has a bistatic design. The transmitting antenna in this system consists of a large number of single patches arranged in rows and columns which are wired in such a way that superposition produces a concentrated radar beam along similar lines to concentration by a lens.
The receiving antenna typically consists of a number of single patches arranged in columns which are electrically separated from each other and arranged next to each other. The offset of the individual reception columns generates a phase shift between the received signals of a detected object which is used to determine the angle. A reception column can in an individual case also consist of a number of wired columns.
Determining the angle Angle evaluation utilizes the dependence of the antenna characteristic in amount and phase on the direction to the object of the outgoing or incident waves. To evaluate the outgoing waves a number of transmitting antennas are required which exhibit a directionality compared to its characteristic, for example via different directions of maximum radiation . A number of receiving antennas can be used and evaluated in the same way.
If both a number of transmitting antennas and a number of receiving antennas are used for angle evaluation, the term used, based on communication technology, is MIMO systems . This enables the direction to the object to be determined even more accurately.
Variants of radar sensors: In the past a distinction was made between short range radars will dominate the market, supplemented by a long range radar. Short range radars have a typical range of 20 to 50 m and a beam angle of up to 160deg. Long range radars have ranges of approximately 300 m and beam angles of up to 100deg; mid range radars have ranges and beam angles in between.
Vehicles in the future will often have five or more radar sensors all round the outer skin, placing a virtually continuous envelope around the vehicle and providing the opportunity for further assistance functions to make driving safer and more comfortable.
Homologation Radar sensors are in accordance with the requirements devices which transmit and receive radio waves. Their operation is therefore governed by country specific regulations worldwide. So called homologation ensures that for each country in which radar sensors are to be operated the legal requirements are satisfied and the sensor receives type approval.
Radar sensors are usually approved by the manufacturer, e.g., Robert Bosch GmbH. The vehicle manufacturers then refer in the Owner's Manual or on specially set up websites to type approval by the manufacturer.
Homologation covers both the technical aspects  and the labeling of radar sensors. Using the EU as an example, a radar sensor must among other things carry a specifically sized CE mark in a visible location on the sensor. Homologation must both be completed before the radar sensor is put on the market for the first time and, depending on the country, also be renewed on a regular basis.
Functions and applications: Previous applications The use of lidar sensors .
Future applications Since 2010 lidar sensors with constantly increasing resolution and range have been in development. Above all the development of powerful lasers and low noise, high resolution image receptors have led to the situation today where comparatively cheap solutions are available. By 2025 driven by functional safety a dramatic increase in the number of lidar sensors for highly automated driving functions is expected . Derived from this is the need for a redundant sensor design with wherever possible different physical measurement principles. In other words, lidar sensors will in future closely accompany video and radar sensors. Examples of the first driving functions in development with lidar are the urban automated taxi and the first expressway/freeway pilots in the truck and passenger car sectors.
Operating principle Distance measurement Lidar sensors operate with laser beams in the infrared range .
Intensity measurement As well as the time of flight the intensity . It is therefore possible using additional model assumptions to extrapolate from intensity to reflectivity, an additional object characteristic.
Image build up Distance measurement is used to measure a distance value between the lidar sensor and an object located at the solid angle captured by the light .
To resolve the surroundings spatially as a three dimensional image, it is necessary to capture many solid angles within a desired field of vision independently of each other. There are two known fundamental principles for this purpose. Firstly, the number of transmitting elements or receiving elements can be increased by further, spatially independent pairs. Within a pair there can be transmitting and receiving elements in any ratios .
Depending on the distance and resolution, the captured objects must be detected in great detail in a high resolution 3D image. In this way, contours of Lidar sensor system
vehicles, persons, and other objects, in : cluding in particular the road surface and infrastructure, can be detected in great detail. At short distances to the sensor even body language and hand gestures of persons can be resolved.
The lidar sensor captures an intensity image as well as the 3D image. Unlike a video camera, however, it contains only light from a narrow IR wavelength range  is much lower than a video camera.
UAE1417E Receiving path o Scan Transmitting path Transmitting path Transmitting path Number of transmit and receive elements: Mirror o o Mirror Mirror Receiver Transmitter Transmitter Receiver 1:1 element D: small number discrete elements N: large number discrete elements Receiver Transmitter Receiver Transmitter N1xD1 1...D2 1...D1 1...D2 a c b Receiving path Receiving path
Properties and use: Ranges Comparable to other environment sensors in the motor vehicle, lidar sensors can also be classified according to their typical detection range. The following details of ranges always relate to weakly reflecting objects . The maximum range can typically be taken as double the value.
Near field lidar Near field lidar Near field lidar has a range of almost 0 m to around 30 m and ideally a field of view approaching a hemisphere arrived on the market in 2017, numerous manufacturers have been announcing their arrival on the market with larger quantities for the period between 2021 and 2023.
Long range lidar Long range lidar Long range lidar has a range of around 1 to 150 m and a field of view comparable to mid range lidar. The angle resolution is horizontally and vertically around 0.08 to 0.15deg. With three to six sensors distributed around the vehicle highly automated driving functions in the urban environment are possible. A front sensor facilitates highly automated driving functions on expressways/freeways. Here lidar is on an equal footing with radar and camera. A number of development projects since 2010 having been focusing on this lidar class, which is among the fundamental components of the highly automated driving functions.
Ultra long range lidar Ultra long range lidar Ultra long range lidar has a range of around 200 to 300 m and a field of view of 50 to 90deg. The angle of resolution is horizontally and vertically below 0.05deg. A sensor mounted at the front permits high driving speeds well above 100 km/h and full monitoring of large intersection areas. Lidar bears the main responsibility for these tasks compared to radar and camera.
Even if the development activities, apart from one exception, are in their infancy, the first sensors will be ready to go into production by 2023.
Properties Distance accuracy Distance accuracy Some properties are shared by all lidar classes to a large extent. Thus distance accuracy registers for the most part between 5 and 15 cm. The frame rate registers for the most part between 10 and 25 Hz.
Image resolution: Image resolution The image resolution is very different, ranging between some 1,000 and several 100,000 pixels. Here each pixel contains as a 3D pixel at least one piece of distance information and one piece of direction information, frequently one piece of intensity information , less frequently additional classification information.
Disadvantageous properties Disadvantageous properties The most important disadvantageous properties of lidar sensors are today their size and their still high cost.
If the object surface ~ 1/r4.
Significant losses occur due to scatter and absorption through optical elements, contamination, and the atmosphere . Fog, mist/haze, and spray can result in a substantial scatter of the light. The atmospheric losses are taken into consideration in the optical losses in the transmitting and receiving paths.
damping 
Dynamic range: Dynamic range The dynamic range of the receiving power P is calculated at constant transmitting power P0 from the reflectivity of the objects and the distance range to be measured at around 100 to 160 dB.
To adapt to the large dynamic range required, some receiving circuits operate primarily in saturation, with the result that only edge detection is possible. In other words, the very high gain of the analog receiving power leads to an almost digital switching performance. Other systems perform a dynamic adjustment of the receiving power gain, e.g., increasingly with rising time of flight. An adjustment of the transmitting power can also be made.
Signal to noise ratio Signal to noise ratio To safely identify the useful signal, its power must be clearly above all the noise outputs in the system; the signal to noise ratio must be large enough. Aside from all the electronic noise sources the Sun and artificial light sources constitute a significant noise source.
A widely used method to increase the signal to noise ratio is statistical improvement by accumulation of several individual measurements. This accumulation can take place both directly in the detector and also in the digital domain.
Wavelength and Wavelength and eye safety eye safety Few wavelength ranges are well suited for lidar sensors. These are derived from the availability of suitable transmitting and receiving components, from eye safety . The demand for a light source that is invisible to humans leads to a wavelength above 850 to 880 nm.
A first atmospheric window then extends up to around 930 nm. 905 nm represents a good compromise between lowpriced lasers and silicon detectors whose quantum efficiency decreases rapidly above 850 nm. The limits of the maximum permissible radiation to comply with eye safety are at 905 nm still really low because infrared light close to visible light still strikes the retina virtually undamped. Nevertheless, this is the most widespread wavelength today.
A second atmospheric window for which lasers are available is at 1,300 nm, a third at 1,550 nm. For both wavelengths it is necessary to use other detector substrates whose maturity, costs, and noise performance are comparatively unfavorable. The limits of eye safety are however much higher because infrared light is to a large extent absorbed by the aqueous humor. The advantage becomes a disadvantage in the detection of wet objects or some objects with a high water content. In all, system performance at these wavelengths has not been examined sufficiently and there is no lidar of this type in series production.
Modulation methods The signal to noise ratio is very much dependent on the type of modulation. Because noise increases with the measurement period, pulse modulation for lidar sensors particularly with medium and high range is the type of modulation favored in practice.
In all direct and indirect pulse time offlight methods the amplitude of the light is modulated. Similarly to radar, FMCW modulation methods in which the wavelength is modulated will in future be used for lidar .
pulse of light is emitted  is identified by means of a pulse detection method and its chronological position and frequently also the signal shape are determined.
Background light is only received in a small time window. The distance is calculated from the chronological position of the received pulse relative to the emitted pulse via the speed of light.
One particularity of the direct pulse time : of flight method is that even a number of received pulses can be determined in succession. Objects can also then still be detected by means of this so called multi target capability .
The reflectivity can be inferred from the signal shape. But a classification can also be made as to for example whether the reflection comes from a hard target .
Pulse detection Two methods are customary for pulse detection. Technically more complicated, but more favorable .
Technically simpler, but involving greater information loss is pulse edge detection .
The lidar block diagram differs for both pulse detection methods in one component only .
a) Transmission of the lidar signal at time t1, b) Reception of the reflected signal at time t2. r Distance between lidar sensor and object, P0 Transmitting power, P Receiving power, tS Transmission time of lidar signal, tE Reception time of reflected signal, H Background light.
Indirect pulse time of flight method: Indirect pulse time of flight method In the case of the indirect pulse time offlight method . The receive pulse is integrated in the receiver in two exposure sections. The contain the phase relation and thus the time of flight between the transmitted and received pulses. This produces the time of flight.
The first exposure section corresponds to the transmission duration so that as the distance to the object increases an ever decreasing proportion of the reflected light still shines into the gate window and consequently can be integrated , no more light can be integrated. This first partial measurement is still ambiguous with regard to object reflectivity and object distance.
a) Block diagram for direct pulse time of flight method with analog to digital converter or time to digital converter, b) Block diagram for indirect pulse time of flight method.  ADC Analog to digital converter,  TDC Time to digital converter,  DSP Digital signal processor,  CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics, Rect Square wave function.
UAE1422 1E UAE1423 1E tS tS tn t2 t1 tA tE Power Time/distance b a Thresholdvalue comparison Time values Digital values Laser Laser driver Pulse generator a Object b Clock Laser Laser driver Rect Modulator Object Clock Photodiode Integrator Correlator DSP mC Amplifier/CFD ADC/TDC DSP mC Photodiode
tively long period of time whose intensity : is much lower. The signal to noise ratio is lowered by the additional background light. In all, no systems with very high ranges can be realized today with this method.
Realization variants There are three realization variants. In the first variant two quickly switchable CMOS imagers .
The second variant implements the principle of beam splitting and distribution to two imagers by means of polarization. A Pockels cell is used instead of two rapidly switchable imagers to rapidly switch the light. The Pockels cell in the process in a few 10 to 100 ns turns the polarization direction of the received light through 90deg. The two imagers are each provided with a polarization filter, both filters being turned through 90deg to each other. By rotating the polarization direction, one imager receives with the rotation an increasing proportion of the light output from near objects, while the other imager receives that from far objects. The object distance can be calculated from the ratio of the two light outputs.
In the third variant the measurement principle is implemented directly in a special CMOS imager in which each pixel consists of two taps .
The high pulse power of the light source and the homogeneous light distribution today pose a major technical challenge for all indirect pulse time of flight methods and owing to the high costs are currently not competitive.
t1, t3 Start, end time, transmission pulse, t2, t4 Start, end time, reception pulse, Dt Transmission pulse length, Dt1, Dt2 Amount of reception pulse inside/outside the transmission window.
CW phase measurement method: CW phase measurement method In the CW phase measurement method . The phase displacement corresponds to the time of flight and thus the distance to the object. The background light is received in a small time window.
The intensity of the emitted light can be taken as sinusoidal. To determine the received signal in full, it is necessary to determine the amplitude, the phase relation, and the offset. Usually this is carried out by integrating the received signals via four phase windows corresponding to the relative phase displacements 0deg, 90deg, 180deg, and 270deg.
Central elements of the CW phase measurement method are CW modulation and correlation with the received signal .
To prevent the pixels from being saturated by strong background light, direct components can be removed in part . The emitted light output can be limited to 1 to 100 W by the integrating method. The duration of a measurement is some ten milliseconds. The modulation frequency is typically 10 to 20 MHz.
Significant drawbacks are the lack of multi target capability, the low immunity to interference, and the insufficient dynamics of the imagers. For applications in motor vehicles the development of PMD cameras was driven on by some manufacturers until around 2015 and then to a large extent stopped.
Measurement 1, tap 1: 0deg Measurement 1, tap 2: 180deg Measurement 2, tap 1: 90deg Measurement 2, tap 2: 270deg Integrated voltages Tap 1 and tap 2 U1 U2 U1 U2 U2 U1 U2 U1
FMCW measurement method: FMCW measurement method In the FMCW measurement method the wavelength of the emitted light is changed . The usual mechanical approaches can be chosen for beam deflection. Research is also being conducted in electronic beam deflection.
Example: For 10 Hz image rate and 300 m maximum range 100,000 pixels are obtained. Without further parallelization this amounts to the maximum number of independently measurable pixels.
Solid state lidar sensors Single beam, multibeam, and flash lidar belong to the class of solid state lidar sensors which operate without mechanically moving components. Figure 12 shows combination options for partitioned transmitting and receiving elements in a solid state lidar. The number of pixels increases with the number of partitions. Single beam lidar . Thus no spatially separable distance measurements are possible inside the solid angle. Only one 3D pixel per measuring cycle is generated.
Multibeam lidar . A high degree of duplication has a detrimental effect on costs compared to more highly integrated systems and consequently such systems for the most part only measure three to five solid angles. It is only advisable to use such systems in applications where rough volume elements are to be checked for the fundamental presence of an object. Multibeam lidar is used very successfully for a rudimentary but effective emergency braking system.
transmitted beam is widened to the entire detection range. In contrast, in the case of part flash lidar, the transmitted beam only covers part of the detection range such that for complete coverage an additional scanner . The vertical resolution is achieved by a vertical partitioning of transmitting or receiving elements or both. The number of transmitting and receiving elements determines the vertical resolution. The individual measurements can take place chronologically in parallel or iteratively. The horizontal resolution is achieved by rotation. The measurements must accordingly take place iteratively. In total a resolution of several 100,000 3D pixels can be achieved.
Transmitting and receiving modules can be laterally or vertically arranged in a rotor scanner . The number of transmitting and receiving elements determines the vertical resolution.
Macro scanner with deflecting mirrors In this variant the transmitting and receiving beams of the single beam, multibeam or part flash lidar are directed via one or more moving mirrors. In view of the many possibilities two typical system configurations will be described.
In the first configuration the beams of vertically partitioned transmitting and receiving elements are deflected via a rotating mirror that rotates about a vertical axis. The horizontal field of view is limited by the size of the mirror and the vignetting of the housing to 90 to 120deg. The resolution is several 100,000 3D pixels.
In the second configuration the beams of individual or few transmitting and receiving elements are directed via two oscillating mirrors with an orthogonal oscillating direction. The beam thus follows the established Lissajous figures. The number of possible pixels is reduced by around 40 % compared to a rotating scanner.
rations of a mirror scanner. A vertically extended beam is directed via a rotating mirror and deflected in both principal directions.
Micro scanner To miniaturize oscillating mirrors 1D or 2D MEMS micro mirrors have proven to be an "optical eye of a needle", which could only be brought under control with the aid of highly voluminous and highly complex optics. In all, micro mirrors offer no advantages for the currently pursued approaches. But they could play a role again in the context of FMCW lidar.
Application: People use their sense of sight to discern the information pertaining to environment detection. Consequently it is natural to develop driver assistance systems on the basis of video data. There are now a multitude of assistance functions and the demands on the video cameras also change, depending on the application.
Indicating display systems The first applications were indicating display systems, such as for example rearview cameras. In these systems importance is attached to high contrast images and color reproduction. The images are often reprocessed to obtain the desired impression in the display.
The higher the degree of automation, the greater the demands on the performance of the cameras. This is achieved through the interaction of the elements of a camera described in the following. The two main components are the image sensor and the objective .
Image sensor: Basic principles of photosensing Aside from a few special applications, image sensors . This technology enables transistors to be embedded in every pixel for control purposes.
In the image sensor many photodiodes are arranged in a rectangular pixel grid. A layer of pand a layer of n conducting semiconductor material meet in a photodiode . An electric field is created at the junction between the two layers, the space charge region. At the same time this space charge region demonstrates a certain capacitance which behaves in inverse proportion to its thickness.
Photodiodes typically work by being charged to a certain potential and then being exposed to light. When photons shine into the semiconductor, electron hole pairs are generated. Here, the quantum efficiency e describes how many electron hole pairs are generated by one photon. The photoelectric current is proportional over many factors of ten to the incident luminous flux and is linear over a wide dynamic range. The photoelectrically generated charges now discharge the photodiode capacitor. The residual voltage is measured once the photodiode has been exposed to light. The difference between this voltage and the output voltage is a measure of the quantity of incident light.
If so many photons shine in that the space charge region is completely discharged, further photons no longer lead to a linear reduction of the voltage and the photodiode is saturated. Efforts are usually made to operate the photodiodes in their linear range. This can be achieved under bright lighting by reading out the voltage already after a short exposure time and by coupling the photodiode to an additional capacitor. However, large capacitors provide a lower voltage drop per photoelectron such that dark scenes and the associated low voltage drops are more difficult to measure.
Design Photodiodes and metal oxide capacitors can be manufactured on a chip with standard semiconductor processes like CMOS. Large photodiodes have a large surface for collecting photons, meaning that they also exhibit low shot noise in dark scenes. Shot noise arises because only integer electrons can be measured. Stochastically a pair of photons more or less meets the photodiode in any exposure. Depending on the quantum efficiency only a part of the photons is converted into electrons that can be read out. Both processes lead to fluctuations even with homogeneous lighting viewed macroscopically.
The ratio of light sensitive volume to lateral face is high for large photodiodes such that cross talk between adjacent photodiodes is easier to handle than for small photodiodes.
Large photodiodes use a lot of silicon surface area, impacting on the sensor costs. The pixels are therefore for the most part designed to be as small as possible to obtain a still acceptable dark sensitivity. The trend towards higher sensor resolutions, i.e., more pixels, provides for ever larger sensors in spite of ever smaller individual pixels. Where in 2010 sensors with a quarter megapixel  and 5 um pixels were customary, in 2020 sensors with 2 megapixels of 3 um each or 8 megapixels of 2.1 um each are the norm.
Activating the image sensor: Aside from the photodiode, each pixel also includes transistors to control the image sensor. These transistors can for example charge the photodiode to the output voltage are direct the residual voltage to the readout electronics. The setup of a simple pixel with three electrodes is shown in Figure 3. Modern pixel designs often contain further transistors to obtain additional functions or improved behavior. The control electrodes of the transistors . The readout lines are connected to each other in columns. If a voltage is applied to the control line to read out a line, all the pixels in this line are simultaneously connected to a readout line.
Each column has its own readout electronics; an entire line can therefore be evaluated in parallel. The voltage is initially analog amplified. The gain is adjustable for many image sensors and influences the sensor's noise performance.
Evaluating the sensor signal The pre amplified signal is then converted in an analog digital converter into a number of fixed bit depth. If the analog voltage is above the reference voltage for the highest digital value, a saturation occurs in the digital output. The saturation threshold of the A/D converter is selected in so that the photodiode still operates in its linear range.
A/D converters with high bit depth can show higher dynamics between the brightest and darkest value, but are costlier to produce and are sometimes prone to higher noise. Through the noise contributions of all the analog components only a limited dynamic range can be sensibly used from a single readout.
Images with high dynamics: Additional techniques are often used in order also to be able to depict scenes with higher dynamics with low noise and without overor underexposed areas.
Dual conversion gain Dual conversion gain One possibility here is "dual conversion gain". A second capacitor can be connected via a resistor to the photodiode for this purpose. The resistors can be realized for example by means of a half closed transistor. While the photodiode discharges immediately when exposed, the voltage follows the supplementary capacitor with a delay. At the end of the exposure the photodiode and the supplementary capacitor are read out separately. The small capacitor of the photodiode exhibits already with low luminous fluxes a high voltage drop and is suitable for dark image areas. The large capacitor is saturated much later and can be used for bright image areas. For the most part the digital values of both readouts are already offset against each other on the image sensor.
Split pixel technology Split pixel technology If the dynamics are still insufficient, a sensor with split pixel technology can be used. Here photodiodes with high and low sensitivity are arranged in pairs and again offset against each other. Usually the sensitive pixel is much larger and absorbs through its surface area more photons than its insensitive counterpart.
Multiple exposure with different exposure Multiple exposure with different exposure times times To further increase the dynamics, it is also possible to record in succession and offset exposures of different lengths. In moving scenes, however, artifacts may appear in the form of multiple edges.
Exposure modes Rolling shutter mode Rolling shutter mode Automotive image sensors are for the most part operated in rolling shutter mode. Here a count variable points at the line currently to be processed. This counter is incremented at a fixed rate, the line rate. Initially, the current line is charged to the output voltage . Then the pixels accumulate the photons and discharge. In a fixed line spacing after the reset line the pixels are connected to the evaluation electronics and converted into digital brightness values. The exposure therefore "rolls" over the sensor.
The advantage of this method is the simple and favorable implementability. The disadvantage is that each line was exposed with different start and end times. Objects may appear distorted as a result. Global shutter mode Global shutter mode In global shutter mode the entire sensor is simultaneously charged to the output voltage. Each photodiode is connected to a light protected capacitor  belonging to the pixel. At the end of the exposure time all the capacitors are simultaneously disconnected from their photodiodes. The voltages can then be read out in succession.
The advantage of this operating mode is that all the pixels are exposed simultaneously and no motion artifacts appear. It is more complex and therefore more expensive to process shielded caps.
Color filters To be able to distinguish colors, photodiodes with different color sensitivity must be arranged on the sensor. In practically all applications photodiodes are damped in a regular pattern with different color filters. This pattern is also called a mosaic. The Bayer pattern is the most widely used pattern in photography. It consists of repeating lines of 2 x 2 pixels. A green filter is applied to two diagonally opposed pixels; the other two pixels are sensitive in the red and the blue .
Human color perception is likewise based : on receptors for red, green and blue. As a result, the camera perceives color spectra similarly to the eye and can reproduce realistic images.
As well as the Bayer pattern there are other color patterns, which can contain for example colorless pixels. Colorless pixels are sensitive to all colors, therefore collect more photons, and have above all in dark scenes advantages in the signal to noise ratio. The same applies to magenta, yellow and turquoise , which transmit in each case two of the three additive primary colors red, green, blue.
If a sensor is offered with a specific number of pixels, this number refers to the sum total of all pixels. There are therefore far fewer pixels available per color channel. The color channels are for the most part interpolated in image preprocessing  in order to have available at each location a brightness value for all color channels.
Objective The objective reproduces light from an object on the image sensor. In the case of a sharp reproduction a point shaped light source is focussed on a dot or as small a spot as possible on the sensor. The object side angle of the incident beam bundle to the optical axis is called the field angle, the distance between the pixel and the optical axis the image height . A reproduction is characterized by among others the following properties: Field of view The field of view is the maximum object side angle at which an object can still in order to still be reproduced. Objectives are designed for a maximum angle up to which they reproduced sharply. Furthermore, the sharpness and brightness of the reproduction often diminish dramatically and the reproduction can no longer be used. Only areas which are reproduced both within this maximum angle and within the sensor size are reproduced in the camera.
Sensors are rectangular, i.e., the size differs in the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal directions. Connected with this are different fields of view in these directions. Projection model The projection model describes how object side field angles are translated into image heights. Two important projections are the pinhole camera model and the equidistant projection model.
1 Objective, 2 Screen, 3 Image, 4 Beam bundle along the optical axis, 5 Beam bundle with field angle th to optical axis. th Field angle, y Image height, D Diameter of beam bundle.
Here y is the image height on the sensor, : f the focal length, and th the field angle. The focal length can be understood in the formula as the enlargement ratio. It should be chosen in the design of the objective in such a way that the desired field of view is reproduced on the sensor. The derivation of the reproduction function, i.e., the change of the image height per angle, is called enlargement. It is often given in the unit pixels per degree. In pinhole cameras the enlargement increases as the field angle increases and diverges at + 90 deg; a sensor of infinite size would be necessary. It is therefore clear that real wide angle objectives must deviate from the pinhole camera model and follow a different projection model.
The angle th must be applied in rad. In this model identical angle changes are translated into identical changes of the image position. The enlargement is constant. Straight lines are generally shown with a barrel distortion.
Distortion Distortion Because many other parameters must also be taken into account in the design of an objective aside from the projection, real objectives rarely follow one of the projection models exactly. The relative deviation of the projection of an objective from a model is called distortion. If no projection model is specified, the pinhole camera model is assumed for the most part as the reference. Through the clever design of the distortion it is possible to place a high level of distortion in image areas in which a degree of camera performance is required.
Luminous intensity The luminous intensity of an objective is traditionally described by the f number familiar from photography. The f number is determined with a parallel . The smaller the f number, the greater the luminous intensity of the objective.
Sharpness: A measure of sharpness widely used in technical optics is the modulation transfer function comprises the processing of an image data sequence by a computer system. The object of image data processing is to detect and classify objects which are relevant to a specific application. In the field of driver assistance systems intelligent camera systems are used in which the captured image data must be processed in real time and only the limited computing resources of an electronic system embedded in the vehicle are available.
SAE1362 1E Machine learning techniques 3D reconstruction Classic image processing algorithms Rectification Image processing Image sensor Camera Exposure control Calibration Image processing chain Computer system Data interface
ing techniques. To finish, the results of the : image processing chain are transferred via a data interface to the following processing steps on the computer system.
Exposure control The exposure time of the image sensor is dynamically adapted to the light conditions of the captured scene with the aid of exposure control. In this way, a sufficiently high range of contrast can be guaranteed at any timed in the image data generated by the image sensor. To this end, exposure control uses brightness information from the currently captured image data to optimize the exposure time for the subsequent capture. The image data stream generated by the image sensor has a frequency of typically 30 Hz or 30 fps .
In camera based driver assistance systems an HDR image sensor is usually used in which differently exposed captures are fused into an overall image with a higher dynamic range. The simplest case here is the combination of an overexposed capture with an underexposed capture. This operation, known as HDR recombination, happens either directly on the image sensor or as part of the subsequent image processing. Scenes with rapidly changing brightness values such as tunnel entrances and tunnel exits pose a challenge for exposure control.
all manner of complexity are known in the : literature to calculate the RGB values . Aside from the RGGB filter, other color filters which typically contain pixels without color information are used for image sensors in camera based driver assistance systems. These intensity pixels  are more light transmitting than color pixels and therefore produce an altogether higher image brightness and as a result a higher contrast reproduction of dark scenes.
Typical color filters with intensity pixels in the field of driver assistance are for example RCCC . Noise reduction Noise reduction Noise reduction serves to suppress image noise and thus to reduce unwanted signal components, improving the signalto noise ratio of the image data stream. Two dimensional filter operations are generally used for noise reduction and applied for each pixel. A typical example of a filter for noise reduction is a Gaussian filter . Small image structures like noise for example are suppressed by the use of the smoothing filter. From a signal theory standpoint the Gaussian filter thus equates to a low pass filter.
Edge preservation Edge preservation The image data were smoothed by the filter operations of the previous processing steps. An algorithm for edge preservation is used in order nevertheless to obtain a detailed image with clearly discernible and sharp edge information. There are numerous established techniques for preserving edge information; these techniques are mostly based on filter operations which ideally sharpen only the edges, but influence or smooth the remaining image data as little as possible. A typical example of an edge preserving smooth filter is a bilateral filter .
Tone mapping Tone mapping The adaptation of contracts within the image data is referred to as tone mapping. This operation can for example increase the range of contrast in dark image areas to facilitate the recognition of existing details there. There are all manner of established global and local algorithms for tone mapping . In most techniques the color value of a pixel is replaced with the aid of a reproduction rule by a different color value. For global techniques a location independent reproduction rule is used for the full image. In the often more complex local techniques the reproduction rule is dependent on the position of a pixel.
Color space conversion Color space conversion In the case of color space conversion the image information in the RGB color space is carried over for each pixel to a different color space because other color spaces are better suited for some computer vision algorithms. For example, the YUV color space facilitates through the separation of brightness information a simplified processing of algorithms which only process luminance values.
Typically, algorithmic techniques for 3D reconstruction only work on the brightness information of an image. Machine learning techniques are typically in a position to work on the basis of information from both the RGB color space and the YUV color space. For color space conversion there are very many different and in part also internationally standardized conversion rules .
Calibration: The calibration of a camera system is required to describe the relationship between a point in the real world and its projection on the focal plane.
Static calibration Static calibration The theoretical basis for static calibration is an idealized camera model which describes the mathematical relationship between a point in the real world and its projection on the focal plane. The simplest form of a camera model is the pinhole camera model. In this model the captured scene is projected through an idealized pinhole without perspective distortion onto the focal plane is generally used for a rearview camera with a larger aperture angle of more than 180deg.
SAE1365D SAE1366D Optical axis World point Pixel Focal length 2D focal plane Aperture plate 3D world coordinate system Camera coordinate system Image coordinate system Camera model Extrinsic parameters Intrinsic parameters World coordinates Camera coordinates Image coordinates
of a camera. The intrinsic parameters are : typically determined after the production of a camera and stored in a non volatile memory inside the camera.
Extrinsic parameters The relationship between world coordinate system and camera coordinate system is described by the extrinsic parameters of the camera model. A translation and rotation of world coordinates using the extrinsic parameters results in the corresponding camera coordinates. Consequently, the position and orientation of the camera can be described in three dimensional space via the extrinsic parameters. The extrinsic parameters are determined after the camera is installed in the vehicle because these are dependent on its installation location. An external calibration target is typically used to determine the extrinsic parameters. For the mathematical relationships and the transformations using the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters reference is made at this point to further technical literature .
The required parameters for the inherent speed, the steering angle, and the yaw angle are as a rule made available via the vehicle bus . The pitch and roll angles can be determined with the aid of algorithms for image based proper motion estimation. Image based determination of the dynamic vehicle parameters is also called visual odometry.
Rectification: As already mentioned with calibration, an idealized camera model is used for the mathematical description of the relationship between a real point in the world and the associated pixel. In this model the pair of points and the optical center lie on the same optical beam. Furthermore, straight lines in the real world are also reproduced without distortion as straight lines.
With real cameras the assumption of distortion free reproduction is typically not fulfilled, i.e., a straight line in the real world is reproduced crooked. The larger the aperture angle or the field of view of the camera, the greater the distortion of the optical reproduction by the objective and the more crooked real straight lines will be reproduced. Algorithms for rectifying the image are used to correct the distortion of an objective. Thanks to the use of rectification straight lines are again reproduced as straight lines and the assumption of the idealized camera model is valid again.
The parameters A1, A2, and A3 determine the type of distortion: pincushion or barrel. Because the distortion is always specific for a particular objective, the parameters as a rule derive from an exact measurement of the objective after its production. Further distortions Further distortions As well as radially symmetric distortion there are further distortion models, such as for example asymmetric and tangential distortion, which is caused as a matter of priority by a the lenses inside the object being brought out of center. There is no detailed description of the associated complex mathematical relationships at this point and reference is made to further literature .
Because a camera in the vehicle is often installed behind the windshield, the distortion caused by the window glass must also be taken into account in the rectification.
Classic image processing algorithms: The algorithms of classic image processing are based exclusively on mathematical techniques and are divided typically into a feature extraction and a downstream object formation. The classic image processing algorithms included in the field of driver assistance systems typically line detection and light detection.
Line detection Line detection For line detection the conditioned and rectified image data stream is initially processed using a cut off filter. This filter operation produces a gradient image from the original brightness information. In terms of signal processing a cut off filter corresponds to a high pass filter which emphasizes brightness jumps between neighboring pixels and suppresses brightness changes. Retained in the resulting gradient image are thus lines which exhibit at their edges a large brightness jump, such as for example a white line marking on dark gray asphalt, areas of consistent brightness are suppressed. An algorithm frequently used for edge detection is the Canny algorithm, which typically uses the Sobel operator as a filter kernel for partial derivation in the horizontal and vertical directions . The Sobel operator is defined here as a 3x3 filter matrix. A typical application of the Sobel operator is shown in Figure 13. Based on the gradient image pixels with a similar gradient vector and similar intensity are brought together in line segments. After a plausibility check which contains all manner of assumptions for a valid line marking, relevant line segments are linked with valid lane markings and output as line objects. Included in the plausibility check assumptions are for example alignment, strength and bending radius of a line as well as the parallelism of several lines. The presented algorithm facilitates the detection of all the line based lane markings, such as for example continuous and dashed lines and line markings in different colors.
Light detection Light detection Light detection is as a rule used as an input variable for different light functions, such as for example automatic high beam control. The lights of oncoming vehicles and vehicles traveling in front must be detected in a nighttime scene for this purpose. A CCL algorithm . For the detected points of light a series of additional attributes is also established, such as for example size, center point and brightness of the respective group.
The detection of the points of light is followed by their plausibility check using different assumptions, such as for example the brightness and position of the point of light in the image. In this way relevant light objects thus detected as vehicle lights are formed and separated from irrelevant light sources, such as for example reflective road signs.
The algorithmic further development of light detection comprises, aside from the detection of front and rear headlamps, also the stop, turn signal, tail, and hazard warning lamps of other vehicles as well as the detection of the rotating beacons of emergency vehicles. The recognition of traffic lights also poses a further challenge for light detection.
3D reconstruction: The aim of 3D reconstruction is to restore the depth information of a captured scene because this information is lost by the camera system and the associated transition from the real three dimensional space to the two dimensional space of the focal plane. By restoring the depth information it is possible to create a detailed environment model in the area of the captured scene. In this way the drivable corridor ahead of the vehicle can be determined and on this basis a precise trajectory planning can be created for the ego vehicle. A precise 3D reconstruction also facilitates in complex scenarios, for example in roadworks areas on expressways/interstates longitudinal and lateral vehicle guidance. A detailed environment model is absolutely necessary for autonomous driving functions. An exact calculation of the road surface is also made possible by 3D reconstruction. Irregularities such as for example potholes or speed bumps can be detected by means of this surface estimation.
Optical flow Optical flow The optical flow is an algorithmic process on the basis of which the depth information of a scene can be reconstructed.
a) Real points of light, b) Reproduction on points of light, c) Bringing together in a cluster by the CCL algorithm  .
Aside from the Haar like features pre : sented here there are also numerous other feature types known to science, such as for example HOG . The feature size is variable and impacts directly on the computing complexity of the chosen algorithmic approach.
Now feature calculation is performed for each pixel within an image. Aside from the central pixel, all the pixels located in the window are included in the calculation. Based on the results of the feature calculation, each pixel is assigned a signature, e.g., 101100 for the six features from Figure 15. The aim of feature calculation is to generate as clear a signature as possible for all pixels belonging to relevant structures in the image, such as buildings, marker posts or vehicles of all types. During the feature calculation for an entire image a feature map containing all the relevant signatures is created on the basis of the original image data.
If now a feature map is calculated for two consecutive images, the pixels belonging to a structure visible in both images have the same unique signature, i.e., they correspond. This also applies if the ego vehicle moves and the position of a signature shifts from image to image. Signature based correspondence creation, i.e., the location of identical signature values in different images, is one of the core algorithmic components of the optical flow. Starting out from the image position of a signature A at time t1, it is thus possible, referred to the position of the same signature A at the previous time t0, to determine a vector, which is also called the flow vector .
The sum total of all the flow vectors in an image is also called the flow field. In this vector field properly moving objects, such as for example a crossing pedestrian, can be clearly detected because the flow vectors on a properly moving object clearly differ from the vectors of the environment. Because the optical flow does not contain any object assumptions, i.e., the algorithm does not know what pedestrians or other properly moving objects look like, the optical flow facilitates a generic object detection.
Within the framework of scientific papers numerous algorithms for calculating the optical flow have been published in the past few years which aside from the algorithmic complexity also differ in how many flow vectors can be calculated from the image data. A distinction is essentially made here between algorithms which frequently generate very many flow vectors on the basis of interpolation and in this way can create a dense flow field and algorithms which only generate a fraction of the flow vectors and can therefore create only a sparse flow field.
Structure from Motion: The position of a three dimensional world point in the two dimensional focal plane can be calculated with the aid of static calibration. For a known pixel, however, it is conversely possible to calculate only a straight line in three dimensional space on which this point lies. The straight line is also called the line of sight. All the world points which are on this line of sight are projected onto a common point in the focal plane. The depth information of a point in the real world is therefore lost in the reproduction in the two dimensional space of the focal plane, i.e., based on a pixel the distance of the corresponding point in the real world cannot be determined.
To determine the depth information of a point in the real world, it is necessary to capture this point from two camera perspectives. It is thus possible to calculate two non identical straight lines in three dimensional space at whose crossing point ultimately the real world point is situated. Algorithms for calculating the optical flow use as explained previously two captures at different times for the creation of the flow vectors. When the ego vehicle moves, the two capture times correspond to two camera perspectives at different times. For a static structure in the real world it is now possible to determine two non identical lines of sight on the basis of which the real distance of the structure can be calculated. For this purpose, aside from the flow vector, the parameters for the vehicle's proper motion must be know, for example how far the vehicle has moved between the two capture times. It is thus possible to calculate depth information for all structure in the real word for which a unique signature has been allocated and which consequently can be found in the image data of both capture times.
A depth map of the captured scene is created in this way. This flow based technique of 3D reconstruction is also called "Structure from Motion" .
A drawback of flow based 3D reconstruction is however the dependence on the ego vehicle's proper motion, i.e., when the ego vehicle is stationary, flow based 3D reconstruction of the captured scene is not possible.
Stereo vision Stereo vision Another algorithmic technique for reconstructing the depth information of a scene is stereo vision, i.e., a scene is captured at the same time by two image sensors. This equates to human sight with two eyes. Like the optical flow, this technique too is based on signature based correspondence creation. To this end a feature calculation is performed in the first step as with the optical flow in order to generate signatures that are as unique as possible for real structures. Because of the assigned signature a structure in the real world can then be found in a captured image. Stereo vision, however, does not use like the optical flow the signature based correspondence creation on the basis of two consecutive images of the same camera, but on the basis of two images captured at the same time by independent cameras. If the position of a signature A is known for the optical flow at time t1, this signature A referred to the time t0 may have moved in any direction horizontally and vertically.
identical intrinsic parameters. In addition, : the focal planes must be parallel to the base line, which connects the optical centers of the cameras. The length of the base line between the optical centers is also called the base width of a stereo system. In addition to the parallel alignment of the cameras the optical centers of both cameras must be at the same height. To completely satisfy the simplified epipolar geometry, the pixels of an image line in the left camera image must correspond to the same image line in the right camera image. Therefore a distortion free image of the individual cameras is required as well as intrinsic and extrinsic calibration. The function of a camera system in the vehicle must be guaranteed over a wide temperature range and is subject to constant vibration and aging effects. To this end a camera system always has production related manufacturing tolerances and installation related installation tolerances. To be able to guarantee compliance with the stereo normal case also for a stereo system installed in the vehicle, as a rule an algorithmic component extending beyond the mentioned intrinsic and extrinsic calibration and rectification is required to establish and maintain the stereo normal case. This component is also called stereo calibration.
i.e., in this case the left camera. The dis : tance to the world point P is thus inversely proportional to the disparity d. In this way it is possible to calculate the disparity for all the visible and clearly corresponding world points in the two images and create a disparity map which contains the depth information of the captured scene. Generally: The greater the disparity the closer an object is and the smaller the disparity the further away an object is.
Comparison of optical flow and  Comparison of optical flow and  stereo vision stereo vision Stereo vision has a number of advantages over 3D reconstruction based on the optical flow, but also disadvantages for an application in the automotive sector. The stereo based measurement method is constantly available compared with the optical flow and is not dependent on the vehicle's proper motion. The depth calculation of the flow based method on the other hand requires as accurate an estimation of proper motion as possible and knowledge of the capture times of the individual images because these have a direct bearing on the accuracy of the depth estimation.
A drawback of stereo vision is the need for a second camera, which typically entails much higher costs for a stereo camera system. The optical flow offers analogously to stereo vision the possibility of calculating depth information on the basis of the vehicle's proper motion with a generally cheaper mono camera system. For this reason the flow based 3D reconstruction technique "Structure from Motion" is frequently also called "Motion Stereo" . Machine learning techniques In the field of computer vision a typical task for an algorithm is to search for specific objects in the image, such as for example pedestrians, bike riders, motorcycles, cars, and trucks. Detecting these objects is a challenging task for a computer system, which is typically solved with techniques from the field of machine learning, which is a sub area of artificial intelligence.
SAE1373 2E World point P Epipolar line Focal length f Base width B Focal planes Right camera Left camera Depth Z X xR xL X B
a specific task. These image data se : quences involve so called training data in which the objects to be detected were identified beforehand. The identification of objects is also known as labeling and is the basis for supervised machine learning. Based on the labeled training data the algorithm generates a mathematical model that enables its to detect relevant objects within an image with a high degree of probability. Not only does the algorithm detect these specific objects in the known training data, but it is also in a position to detect these objects in new and previously unknown image data. The greater the labeled training data volume the more probable it is that the algorithm will detect a specific object hitherto unknown to it. What is important here is not only the amount of training data but also as high a variance as possible within the training sequences, such as for example the coverage of all manner of light and weather conditions.
Because the training data are typically stored on servers or a data cloud, the volume of training data is an important cost factor. Ideally, a computer system would detect and classify 100 % of all the relevant objects within a scene. However, this is not possible in the real world on account of their complexity. Thus, the aim of object detection is as high a detection rate as possible with at the same time a low error rate. With machine learning techniques the achievable detection rate is decisively dependent on the training data volume used and thus the associated data costs. Cascading object classifier Cascading object classifier An example of the implementation of a machine learning technique is the cascading object classifier, which is typically based on a supervised learning technique. Here for each item of input data the labeled training data volume is used to defined the result to which the classification must lead. Typically a cascading object classifier is used to detect and object class such as for example pedestrians, bike riders or motorcycle riders. A cascading object classifier generally consists of a number of classifiers which are linked in the form of a decision cascade. This is then applied to each pixel of the incoming image data stream. If the decision cascade has been fully run through, there is a very high probability that there is a relevant object at this image position. If the cascade has not been fully run through, there is a very high probability that there is no relevant object at the processed image position. The decision cascade is then canceled early and the current image positions are rejected. Through the early rejection of non relevant positions the cascading structure facilitates an optimization of the total running time of the object classifier because all the existing classifier stages doe not have to be calculated for each image position .
SAE1374 1E Classifier stage 3 Classified objects Rejected image positions Classifier stage 2 Classifier stage 1 Image data stream true false false false true true
flow, Haar like features. The manner of : the links within the decision tree and the concrete elaboration of the features is determined by the previously specified learning technique . Numerous algorithmic techniques are known in the literature for implementing a cascading object classifier .
Deep learning Deep learning In the area of machine learning the basic relationship that a larger volume of labeled training data leads to a higher detection rate of the algorithms used applies. In particular, this applies to the deep learning techniques which, when compared with classic machine learning techniques such as for example a cascading object classifier for an increasing volume of training data, can achieve a higher detection performance .
The deep learning techniques are based on artificial neural networks the structure of which on an abstract level are based on the information processing in the human brain. The algorithms uses here a number of processing layers which process the incoming raw image data in stages. The deep learning algorithms learn independently which calculation parameters must be used on which level to achieve an optimal detection result.
One implementation possibility for an artificial neural network is the deep neural network , which are a specific form of deep neural network, are typically used. In the internal processing layers of a CNN discrete convolution operations are used which when compared with the general matrix multiplication of a DNN can be carried out with simpler filter operations and can thus be implemented with less effort in an embedded system. The processing layers between input and output layers are also called hidden layers.
for each filter kernel corresponding to an : artificial neuron. Depending on the CNN result the values of the filter kernels are independently optimized by the network, i.e., the neural network learns independently. In the pooling layer the existing data volume is decreased by combination of the filter responses and the size of the filter kernels is reduced. In the ensuing fully connected layer all the neurons of the pooling layer are connected with all the neurons of the following output layer. In a CNN based classifier the number of neurons in the output layer as a rule corresponds to the number of object classes to be classified.
There are as a rule in a CNN a number of interlinked units consisting of convolutional and pooling layers which thus form a multi stage or else deep neural network. For the implementation of a CNN in a driver assistance system the CNN network architecture is typically adapted to the architecture of a suitable hardware accelerator within the embedded system.
In the field of driver assistance systems a CNN is as a rule taught in during the development process and adopted in series in a defined state. Training takes place under monitored condition, i.e., the object classes for the output layer of the neural network are specified during the learning phase. The validation of an algorithm based on deep learning is the object of the validation. This is based as a rule on a volume of validation data that are not dependent on the training data.
A CNN does not require any additional conditioning of the input image data when compared with other algorithmic techniques such as for example line detection based on cut off filters. In the classic image processing techniques the filter kernels must as a rule be developed on an application specific basis; a neural network, however, learns these filters implicitly.
One of the typical applications for a CNN is semantic segmentation, which assigns one of the learned object classes to each pixel. In addition, a CNN facilitates the detection and classification of objects such as for example road signs, traffic lights, and lane markings and roadsides of all kinds . Single task networks, which process only one of the tasks mentioned, and multi task networks, which facilitate the performance of a number of tasks within a CNN, are possible here. The architecture of single task and multi task networks is likewise the object of current research in the field of computer vision.
Data interface: Objects and measured data are typically transmitted via the computer vision data interface. The objects detected and classified by the classic image processing algorithms and the machine learning techniques include for example lines, points of light, vehicles, and pedestrians.
________________________________ References References R. I. Hartley, A. Zisserman: Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision. 2nd Edition, University Press, Cambridge, 2004.
Introduction: Perception of the environment People use their sense of sight when driving a car to discern the information pertaining to environment detection.
Thus, the conclusion could be made that an autonomously driving vehicle only needs one video sensor to perceive the environment .
Sensor data fusion in the automated driving environment Sensor data fusion is essential in the field of automated driving for a number of reasons. Humans have as part of their evolution developed highly effective and efficient perception based on visual stimuli. We are currently not yet at the stage where we can emulate this so well and computation efficiently that it can be implemented in a vehicle with limited energy resources. Current video sensors are stretched to their limits particularly in adverse weather conditions, for example due to the low signal to noise ratio  and thereby limited detection capability. Furthermore, an automated driving solution must be better than a human and at the same time safe in order to be accepted by society. The processing overhead in perception can be reduced by having the scene measured very well and in such a way that the separability of interesting from uninteresting scene content is consistently as big as possible. This happens currently by using numerous sensors to measure the environment. In addition, fused measurements of numerous sensors also increase safety, above all in the event of a sensor failure. Glossary Special terms are used in the field of sensor data fusion and will be explained here. Sensor space Sensor space The sensor space contains the depiction of the environment based on the sensor measurements, e.g., pixels or images for a video sensor and point clouds for a lidar sensor.
Feature vector Feature vector This is a vector with features. With regard to a pattern a feature is a scalar by which a particular aspect of the pattern is described.
Inference Inference Inference denotes the acquisition of information by reaching a conclusion. Within the framework of a stochastic consideration it is concerned with the calculation of joint and conditional probabilities, e.g., in the case of a classifier the conditional probability of the class output is calculated depending on the feature vector input. Perception Perception Perception refers to a subconscious process of individual information and perception processing which gives rise in the consciousness of the information recipient to images of perceived partial aspects of reality.
Sensors: There are currently in the automated driving environment a number of types of sensors whose measured data are fused to perceive the scene. Each sensor measures certain specific properties of objects . Using these properties it is then possible to separate the objects from the background and differentiate them from each other on the assumption that these differences are found in the sensor measurements.
Sensor types Video sensors Video sensors Video sensors  operate with electromagnetic waves in the visible light range. A video sensor is able to convert photons to charge or to voltage. It generates a signal depending on the intensity and color composition of the light that is incident upon the sensor.
There are two types of objects: light sources and reflectors. In both case the composition of the light that comes from an object is dependent on specific object properties . Lidar sensors Lidar sensors Lidar sensors operate with infrared light. Unlike a video sensor, lidar is an active sensor. Lidar sends light beams with a certain distribution in the scene and receives the reflections back. The lidar uses the delay with which the emitted light after being reflected by the object is received by the sensor to measure the distance to the objects in the scene. A 3D representation of the scene is thus produced. The objects are then distinguished via their geometric structure. Modern lidar sensors are also able to measure the speed of objects.
Radar sensors Radar sensors Radar sensors operate with electromagnetic waves in the radio range. Radar is likewise an active sensor, emitting a signal and measuring the reflection of the signal by objects in the scene. Essentially the distance to the object is measured by way of the delay.
Radar sensors also measure the speed of the object and properties of the reflecting object surface. Compared to lidar, radar typically delivers a sparser 2D range map and not a dense 3D representation of the scene, but the quality of the radar measurement is significantly less susceptible to weather conditions. Different technical approaches can be used to increase the resolution of radar sensors significantly.
Ultrasonic sensors Ultrasonic sensors Ultrasonic sensors operates with sound waves above the audible frequency range. They are also active sensors. Ultrasonic sensors have a very short range compared to video, lidar, and radar, but are low priced and robust against weather conditions.
Perception To perceive a scene, the information from the environment, just as it is measured by a sensor, is analyzed in a first step and relevant scene content is detected and tracked over time. In a second step the objects are placed in relation to each other. This second step generates additional information, which, together with the information extracted in the first step, describes the scene in full.
En route from the sensor measurement to the detected object the scene information passes through various processing steps . To improve object detection and tracking, information from a number of sensors is combined at different points along this processing chain.
Thus, sensor data fusion is concerned with the processing of information which is obtained from the measurements of different sensors. The aim is to separate important scene content robustly and with high quality from unimportant content and to track the important content over time. Representation of the driving scene Currently most algorithmic solutions of the fusion tasks follow two architectures, which differ in the way in which information from the driving scene is depicted. Grid approaches Grid approaches Grid approaches are based on discretizing the driving scene into typically non overlapping areas. At each point in
time a decision is made on the basis of : the sensor measurements as to whether one of these areas is filled by an object. Individual areas can then be aggregated to objects in further steps .
Object model approaches Object model approaches Object model approaches for their part use from the outset an explicit representation of the objects. This representation is of a geometric nature and is usually based on the principle of the enclosing polytope. It contains object properties such as size, orientation, position, and dynamics and is recalculated at each point in time on the basis of the sensor measurements.
Fusion types Depending on the position along the processing chain at which the information from the sensors is combined, a distinction is made between three types of sensor data fusion.
Early fusion En route from the sensor measurements to a detected object the scene information passes through a number of processing steps. In this way measurements from the sensor space are aggregated to feature vectors before it is decided whether and what kind of an object is situated at a certain point.
In the case of early fusion the sensor space extends across all the available sensors. Subject to this common sensor space is a model which describes how individual sensor measurements are to be combined with each other. The parameters of the model can be set on the basis of a priori knowledge or learned from tgen.data. The block diagram of this type of early fusion is shown in Figure 1.
Traditional approaches Traditional approaches Traditional approaches to early fusion contain a separate step in which the sensor space is explicitly generated and the model parameters are set with reference to different considerations. This step is the basic principle on which the other information processing steps function.
Learning method: Learning method If there is to be an underlying learning method, there is the possibility of combining the sensor space generation with subsequent and likewise learning based information processing steps. Here the parameters of the respective algorithmic blocks are learned together. In this case the sensor space is only implicitly generated. Better results can be obtained by optimal mutual adaptation of the steps that are based on one another. However, it is in this case more difficult to follow which type of information is used where and what effect each step has along the processing chain. Neural networks offer the opportunity to implement such a procedure relatively easily.
Discussion Discussion Perception functions like an information funnel. This extracts from the superset of scene information which the sensors measure only the information relevant to the automated driving tasks. There information is filtered out at different points by different mechanisms. One of these mechanisms provides that potential object information with a reduced SNR is ignored. The upshot of this is that incorrect detections but at the same time also some correct detections are prevented.
Early fusion has the potential to achieve optimal perception performance. This is primarily because complementary information from all sensors is used without discarding object information with a reduced SNR from one sensor. Even if an object exhibits information with a low SNR for all sensors, there is in the case of early sensor data fusion a good opportunity to detect the object by analyzing the dependencies between the measurements in different sensor spaces.
This is often difficult because the times of measurement can differ very markedly from sensor to sensor. The calibration requirements are also very stringent in the case of early fusion and the hardware requirements increase because larger volumes of data have to be processed simultaneously. Calibration is the name of the process of determining sensor parameters. Furthermore, already the failure of a single sensor can lead to problems in the subsequent processing chain.
Another difficulty of a practical nature is that the sensor interface is not yet standardized. The ISO 23150 standard TC22/ SC31 , which is intended to standardize this interface in future, is currently in the preparation stage. Not all the sensors make a raw data interface available or meet the necessary synchronization and calibration requirements.
Mid fusion: In the case of mid fusion the sensor spaces of the individual sensors are examined for conspicuous regions and if necessary features are extracted before these are combined for object detection. Similarly to early fusion objects are in this way detected on the basis of an overall sensor description of the scene; however, the search for conspicuous regions is sensor specific. Figure 2 shows a typical block diagram for this type of fusion. Discussion Discussion Mid fusion has the potential for improved performance with similar, but less pronounced drawbacks of early fusion. Thus the synchronization, availability, and hardware requirements are less stringent because not all the measurements of the various sensors have to be processed simultaneously. However, the difficulties relating to the interface also remain for mid fusion.
Late fusion In the case of late fusion objects are first detected sensor specifically before they are aggregated on an overall sensor basis. One option of aggregation entails tracking the sensor specifically detected objects jointly with the aid of a specially adapted measurement model over time.
There are different heuristics to carry out the aggregation. Such approaches also work when the objects in the scene are sensor specifically detected and tracked.
Discussion Discussion Later fusion cannot achieve the performance of early fusion because information which would only be detected in the sensor network is discarded here. Late fusion cannot achieve the quality of mid fusion either because typically sensor specific information in the low SNR range is ignored in order to reduce the number of incorrect detections. However, late fusion does not exhibit the drawbacks of early and mid fusion. Because it is objects and not sensor measurements or scene descriptions that are processed, the data rate is very low. The synchronization and calibration requirements are also low and sensor availability is non critical because in the event of a sensor from the fused network failing the scene can nevertheless be perceived by having the objects of the other sensors analyzed.
of automated driving means that the focus : of development is on primarily mid fusion. Early fusion presents itself above all as the benchmark and for task with the highest performance requirements.
Information basis of object detection Depending on how information is introduced over time in the decision problem of object detection, there are a number of ways of fashioning this step algorithmically. Deep neural networks with special architectures play a particular role here.
There is thus a history of sensor specific information available to object detection. Alternatively, only information which was collected across overall sensor conspicuous regions from sensor specific measurements without a history is used. Particularly for early and mid fusion the decision about the procedure for object detection leads accordingly to an adaptation of the functional block diagram. The aggregation step can then solve different tasks, such as for example tracking or the consolidation of tracking results.
AI based sensor data fusion Artificial intelligence Artificial intelligence . Different sensors can be used to measure the scene optimally and thereby establish the basis for optimal detection and tracking.
The tracking of objects and their detection are implemented as part of perception by AI algorithms. Usually the parameters of the algorithms that implement the tracking are defined on the basis of a priori knowledge while the parameters of the algorithms that implement the detection are learned from tgen.training data. But there are also algorithmic solutions to the tracking problem which are based on learning approaches.
The algorithmic paradigms which make it possible to carry out detection and tracking and then in each case the most common approaches in the automated driving context will be discussed in the following. Fusion approaches differ in how the combine and implement these algorithms.
Object detection: A decision problem is solved in order to detect objects. All the sensor measurements are analyzed and a decision is made whether these originate from an object. In practice the definition of an object is highly variable. Thus, an object can be understood to be part of a set, such as for example everything that moves, or standalone, e.g., a motorcycle. The term used here is detection when the important is separated from the unimportant, where what is important is problem dependent. Classifiers Classifiers Decision problems are solved by classification algorithms. These algorithms implement classifiers. These are mathematical functions which constitute a relationship between an input and a discrete output. The input is a mathematical object constitute the input of the classification algorithms and the set of object types the output.
The mathematical expression of a classifier is an important design parameter. Of particular importance in view of their performance are neural networks , where different types of classifiers exist. Neural networks are classifiers which are constructed by the combination of a number of simpler functions, i.e., neurons. The parameters of a classifier can either be determined manually on the basis of a priori knowledge or determined automatically. Automatic determination of the parameters happens as training as part of a machine learning process. The calculation of the output of a classifier for a given input is called inference.
Either data or rewards underlie the training. If exclusively input output pairings , the training is not supervised. There is also the possibility of using a mixture of labeled and unlabeled data.
Linear classifiers and the Linear classifiers and the perceptron perceptron The simplest decision problem that a classifier could solve is binary. In this case the input of the classifier is to be assigned to one of only two possible classes. Because multiple class decision can be made as a combination of a number of binary decisions, it is sufficient for the moment to consider the binary classifier.
_ > wT  _ > x  where  _ > w is a vector with parameters.
The zero level set of a linear classifier is a hyper level. Accordingly only such separating levels between the classes can be modeled in the input vector space, which constitutes a significant limitation of linear classifiers in practice.
1, y >= 0 Thus the input vector belongs to the class "1" when y >= 0, otherwise it belongs to the class "0".
Such flat neural networks can already approximate all the possible nonlinear functions and are in this sense universal approximators. In practice, however, it has emerged that deeper neural networks process the information more efficiently than flat neural networks because they achieve comparable results with few parameters.
consisting of three layers xi  Neurons of the input layer, wij Weights of the hidden layer, yj  Neurons of the hidden layer, wjk Weights of the output layer, yk  Neurons of the output layer.
be the number of wheels. Thus, instead : of analyzing pixels, the number of wheels is considered in order to decide on the class of the input object. However, the input must be transformed in order to reach the features that are of interest. The major practical advantage of deep neural networks is that this transformation is also learned during the training with the classifier parameters.
Supervised training Supervised training The case in which the training occurs on the basis of a set of labeled data is considered in the following because this method is currently through its performance the most widely used in the automated driving environment and plays a particular role in perception.
The training is implemented as an optimization method. The parameters of the classifier are calculated as the argument of a function, which implements a specific measure, for which this function achieves its optimum. There are different measures which can be used. These measures are defined within the framework of learning theories.
Ideally a learning theory should result in a measure that minimizes the probability of an error relating to inference time. Because this is difficult or even impossible to determine, the measures usually consider the complexity of the classifier and the errors that it makes on the existing data record. The underlying intuition is that fewer complex classifiers generalize better. Where a classifier that generalizes wheel decides for new input data similarly well as for the data on which it was trained. For deep neural networks an attempt is made in the case of preset complexity to minimize the error on the training data record. Because well designed deep neural networks are universal approximators, minimizing the error on the training record always works. However, the neural network then memorizes and cannot generalize. This contradicts the previous generalization assumption that the performance on the training data is reflected on previously unseen data. The result of this is that usual learning theories simply do not correctly grasp the generalization capacity of neural networks, which in turn compels the application of different heuristics. In order to that effect to maintain the generalization capacity, the quality on an additional data record, the validation data record, is observed during the training. The parameters of the neural network are set with the aid of the training data, but the training is interrupted as soon as the error on the validation data rises. There are also other different heuristics which improve the generalization capacity particularly for deep neural networks.
During the trainings an optimization problem is solved with the aid of a gradient method. Derivations are to be determined for this purpose. That is the reason why perceptrons, which use a non derivable nonlinearity, are not suitable for neural networks.
For neural networks the training is conducted efficiently with the aid of the "backpropagation algorithm". For deep neural networks special measures are to be taken to guarantee the successful convergence of this algorithm.
Tracking The sensors measure the scene in predefined time intervals. A measurement is available in each case at the end of a time interval. Through tracking an object is to be found again in each measurement and the properties of an object observed over time. The tracking problem is aggravated by the fact that the movement of the object in the time interval between two measurements is unknown. In addition, sensor noise prevents a simple assignment of a measurement to an object.
The tracking problem is solved by the analysis of a chronological sequence of measurements. There are different approaches to conducting this analysis. Firstly, the modeling of the chronological sequence is to be considered as a discrete stochastic signal. The parameters of this model are established on the basis of a priori knowledge.
What is notable in this connection is that certain object properties cannot be observed directly. This happens indirectly by way of an estimation of the attributes from the measured values over time.
Stochastic signal: Stochastic signal A stochastic signal xt .
, which aside from the position of the tracked object at time t1 can also contain the speed and other properties of the object.
To solve the tracking problem, it is necessary to calculate the state vector xt at time t. For this purpose first the probability density function p reaches the maximum. Assuming a Gaussian distribution xt is calculated using the expectation operator.
The tracked object moves and does not change arbitrarily over time, its state vector at time t depends on the state vector at time t 1. Furthermore, the full history of the object is known and thus its current state can be better extrapolated. The probability of xt can be calculated as a function of the full history of the object, i.e., what is sought is the conditional density p.
This conditional density can be derived from the stochastic model p of the tracking problem, i.e., inference is carried out in the model. The basis of inference is the property that a joint probability can be shown as the product of a number of factors, where each factor is either a conditional probability or a different joint probability.
Stochastic graphical models Stochastic graphical models By showing a stochastic model in graphical form, it is possible to make an inference in an intuitive way. One method for this is to use so called stochastic graphical models , also known as probabilistic graphical models .
A graphical model reflects the way in which a joint probability can be represented as the product of conditional probabilities, together with the dependencies between different components of the model. Each node represents a random variable or a set of random variables and each connection a dependency.
To solve the tracking problem it is assumed that the current state vector only depends on the previous one and only via it on all other previous states before last. The corresponding graphical model is shown in Figure 7.
Kalman filter Kalman filter To solve the tracking problem it is not possible to observe the state vectors directly. Instead, each state is measured by a sensor and these measurements which are generated from the states are observed. Because the sensor measurements are subject to noise and the noise is not deterministic, each measurement is itself modeled as a random variable yt. The complete graphical model of the tracking problem is shown in Figure 8.
The tracking problem is now formulated as follows: Determine the state xt from the previous state xt 1 and all the observed measurements { y1,..., yt}.
Tracking in practice Tracking in practice The Kalman filter as a rule delivers an acceptable solution to the tracking problem. In many cases, however, it is necessary to dispense with certain assumptions. If for example Gaussian assumption has to be dispensed with, the solution to the tracking problem must be provided by the particle filter or by variation approaches .
In practice it is often necessary to confronted the fact that the parameters F, C, V and W are time dependent. The variances V and W should then be estimated from the scene via alternative paths from the available evidence. A similar produced is also followed to determine the measurement model.
The parameters of the state model F are themselves modeled as a random variable if they are time dependent. The graphical model is adapted accordingly. In this case the inference is however even more difficult. Simplifications exist in the form of multi model approaches. These conduct a discretization of the functional space of the state model. The most well known of these approaches is the Interacting Multiple Model .
Compounding the situation is the fact that in practice usually a number of objects are to be tracked simultaneously. The association of new measurements with a specific object is then complicated. This association problem has various solutions, many of which are problem dependent.
The most well known general approaches are "Nearest Neighbour", "Joint Probabilistic Data Association", "Multi Hypothesis" .
________________________________: References References A. Elfes: "Using occupancy grids for mobile robot perception and navigation", Computer, Vol. 22, No. 6, pp. 46... 57, 1989.
 C. M. Bishop: Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006.
 Y. Bar Shalom, X. R. Li: Multitarget multisensor Tracking: Principles and Techniques, Storrs: YBS, 1995.
 B. T. Vo, V. N. Vo, A. Catoni, "The cardinality balanced multi target multi Bernoulli filter and its implementations", IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 57, No. 2, pp. 409...423, 2009.
Vehicle navigation: Navigation systems Determination of the position of a vehicle is based primarily on using the GPS satellite positioning system can be evaluated and the antenna can be mounted in a more favorable place for satellite reception. As original equipment, networking with other components is also common, i. e. integration in the operating concept of the vehicle is possible. Voice outputs can be issued via the audio system and muted for telephone calls. The route guidance information can be displayed in the instrument cluster or in the head up display and thus in the driver's primary field of vision.
Functions of navigation Positioning Satellite positioning system GPS Satellite positioning system GPS GPS is based on a network of 24 US military satellites which can be used globally for positioning are visible over the horizon.
The satellites transmit special position, identification and time signals 50 times per second on a carrier frequency of 1.57542 GHz. The satellites each have on board two cesium and two rubidium atomic clocks which vary by less than 20 to 30 ns for the high precision determination of the transmission time.
SKR0166 1E Navigation unit CD/DVD drive or memory card Display and controls Satellite antenna Sensors Digital map Destination input Navigation Route guidance Route computation Map display Satellite receiver Display Voice output Voice recognition Position determination Buttons
fies the distance conditions . Figure 3 shows this process in simplified form in only two dimensions.
Accuracy Accuracy The achievable accuracy is dependent on the position of the satellites that can be received relative to the vehicle. The greater the solid angle of the satellites to the vehicle, the better the possibility of position determination. The achievable accuracy is in the plane approximately 3 to 5 m, and for the determination of height approximately 10 to 20 m.
In deep urban canyons, satellite signals can only be received if the satellites are arranged to a large extent in a line, i. e. in the direction of the street/road. However, the solid angle formed by the satellites is then very small and position determination inaccurate.
Errors in position determination may arise as a result of the reflection of the satellite signals, on metal coated building fronts, for example.
Travel direction determination Travel direction determination The direction of travel can be quickly sensed from the differences in the receive frequency of the satellites which are brought about by the Doppler effect. When a car drives towards a satellite, the GPS receiver of the navigation devices sees a higher frequency than the transmit frequency. It receives a lower frequency from satellites behind. This effect is sufficiently great from a driving speed of approximately 30 km/h to determine the direction. Dead reckoning Dead reckoning Dead reckoning ensures position determination even if no GPS signals can be received, e. g. in tunnels. It adds cyclically recorded distance elements vectorially by magnitude and direction. The speedometer signal transmitted via the CAN bus is used to measure the distance. Changes in direction are recorded by a yaw sensor. In this way, the direction of travel is determined starting out from an absolute direction which was calculated with the GPS signals received last via the Doppler  effect.
Map matching Map matching The procedure known as map matching continuously compares the located position with the route on the digital map. In this way, the exact vehicle position can also be shown on the map, even if the located position is inaccurate . Route guidance driving recommendations can thus be output at the best possible location. In addition, sensor errors and cumulative dead reckoning errors can be compensated.
. Where  the positions of the satellites are known, the  possible reception locations for the measured signal propagation times t1 and t2 are on two circles around the satellites. The point of  intersection A on the Earth is the sought after location.
SAE1024 2Y 1 5 3 4 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 2 SKR0088 1Y A B t2 t1
Destination entry: The destination is entered, for example, via the navigation device panel with buttons, directly via the touchscreen, or by voice input. The user enters all the necessary details from a menu or in response to prompting by acoustically output instructions.
The digital map contains directories so that a destination can be entered as an address. Lists of all known place names are required for this purpose. In turn, all locations are allocated lists containing the names of the stored street names. To pinpoint a destination even further, the user can then also select road/street intersections, or the number of a building. The destination can be quickly entered via the destination memory, with which already entered destinations can be called up again .
For airports, train stations, filling stations, multi storey parking garages, etc. there are thematic directories in which these destinations .
Route recommendations are expected within a few seconds of the destination being entered. A more critical scenario is recomputing the route if the driver departs from the recommended route. The new route recommendations must be supplied before the driver reaches the next intersection or junction.
1 Original main route, 2 Congestion, 3 Alternative route estimated by driver, 4 Best alternative route calculated  by dynamic route guidance.
the Traffic Message Channel of FM radio.
The encoded messages contain, among other things, the location of a holdup, its extent, the actual length, and the reason for it. A navigation system can receive such an encoded message and determine whether a holdup is situated on a planned route. If this is the case, the route is recalculated, where the held up section is evaluated with a longer driving time. A new route bypassing the holdup may be obtained . Further route recommendations will follow in accordance with the new route.
Route guidance Route recommendations Route recommendations Route guidance is performed by comparing the present vehicle position with the computed route. Route recommendations are mainly reproduced acoustically .
Digital map Map display Depending on the system, the map is represented on color displays using scales as of approx. 1:2,000 in 2D, perspective 2D are then integrated into the database.
Specially equipped vehicles drive along roads to record additional trafficrelevant attributes , after which the initial digitization data are checked on site. The results from these recording vehicles are incorporated into the database and are used to produce digital maps.
Data memory Because their storage capacity is at least seven times larger, DVDs have now superseded CDs as the storage medium for digital maps. On the other hand, new systems are mainly being supplied with hard disks or SD cards, where the latter clearly dominate in portable systems. These writable storage media open up the additional possibility of the navigation systems being able to adapt to their users' preferences.
Applications: Darkness leads to two significant restrictions to a driver's sense of sight. Firstly, despite modern lighting technologies such as xenon and LED headlamps, only a very limited illuminated field of vision is available. For example, the range of a typical low beam headlamp is just 50 to 60 m. The visibility range can be increased to over 150 m by using highbeam headlamps, this can only rarely be used during night driving, however, due to the tendency to cause glare for oncoming traffic.
Secondly, the capability to recognize objects in the dark by their color and contrast which differ from those during daylight is often greatly reduced. Pedestrians wearing dark clothing, for example, are frequently difficult to recognize even when they are within the range of the low beam headlamp. Night vision systems and cutting edge headlamp technologies help enormously in this respect to increase road safety.
Camera based night vision systems are classified into two different types based on their underlying spectral ranges: farand near infrared systems. Far infrared systems Operating principle Night vision systems based on far infrared . These are referred to as "passive" systems since they do not need any additional radiation sources to illuminate objects.
The pyroelectric thermal imaging camera, or microbolometer camera, is only sensitive in the wavelength range of 7 12 um. Because the glass in the windshield is not transparent for these wavelengths and the camera must be located on the outside of the vehicle.
1 Camera, 2 Electronic control unit , 3 Display,  4 Infrared headlight, 5 Windshield, 6 Vehicle. UAE1096 3Y 4 5 3 6 2 3 2 1 1 a b
Image display Hot objects are shown in the image as light contours against dark is standing in front of a hot tail panel of a tourist bus, he will not be defined by the camera since the sensor is "dazzled".
However, the image display is rather unusual for the viewer since the appearance does not correspond to that of a normal reflected image.
Near infrared systems Operating principle Near infrared systems .
They are referred to as "active" systems for this reason. An infrared sensitive camera records the scene, i.e., the infrared radiation reflected by the objects. The image signal is transferred to a control unit that in turn forwards the processed image as in the far infrared system to the display. The driver sees in both systems a current image of the road situation . Compared to this, the spectral sensitivity of an imager reaches considerably further into the range of high wavelengths, only ending at around 1,100 nm.
Infrared headlamps Infrared headlamps Halogen lamps, like those commonly used for automobile headlamps, have a infrared radiation content. This ranges from the limit of the visible spectrum  up to wavelengths beyond 2,000 nm, with a maximum between 900 nm and 1,000 nm. The upper limit of the useful wavelength when a video camera is used is 1,100 nm, the sensitivity limit of silicon.
The infrared headlamps that are used have a similar range and spatial characteristics to those of conventional highbeam headlamps, which means that the visual range achieved is comparable but without negatively dazzling other road  users .
Suitable selection of the filter characteristic curve takes competing requirements into account. The spectral sensitivity of the imager decreases as the wavelength rises. In order to exploit its sensitive range, the filter edge for low wavelengths should lie near to the limit for visible light. On the other hand, in order to prevent non permitted red impression for front headlamps, the filter edge should be shifted more towards higher wavelengths. Both requirements can be met by carefully selecting the transmission in the visible range, the position of the filter edge, and the edge steepness. The infrared headlamps are either  integrated into the headlamp module or mounted as external modules e. g. in the front apron of the vehicle.
1 Spectral sensitivity curve V, 2 Spectral sensitivity of video camera, 3 Spectral transmission of filter.
The CCD chip has lower sensitivity to darkness, but doe achieve an intensity dynamic of over 100 dB. There needs to be compensation for every pixel of the fixed pattern noise of this technology. Adjustable, nonlinear characteristic curves mean that these imagers can be very easily regulated and adapted to changing lighting conditions.
Lighting up the road scene with radiation in the wavelength range between 700 nm and 1,000 nm provides the imager of the camera with a useful signal that depends on the illumination strength and spectral reflective capabilities of the illuminated scene.
Activation strategy Activation strategy One major aspect of the system is the automatic activation of the infrared headlamps. They emit light of high intensity that the human cannot perceive or can only perceive to a minor degree. To avoid damage to the eyes caused by unperceived exposure at short distances , the infrared headlamps are only activated automatically when a certain driving speed is reached with the low beam headlamps switched on. If the speed falls below the threshold, it is automatically deactivated. This excludes occurrence of the critical combinations of long exposure and spatial proximity to the emission source. In addition, the infrared headlamps only light up if the adjacent low beam is also switched on. Through this, the blinking reflex is triggered when the headlamp is looked at, as a result of which the exposure of the eye is greatly reduced.
1st generation night vision systems The first system was introduced in 2000 in the American market in Cadillac cars and showed the image of an FIR camera in a head up display . This was closely followed by NIR systems in the Japanese market, which also used a head up display. Due to the high risk of distracting the driver caused by moving images in the primary field of view, these systems were withdrawn from the market after a few years. They could not make the breakthrough in the European market either.
In Japan these first NIR based systems were initially introduced in 2003 in a simple version in terms of image display and with conventional CCD camera technology. In 2005 an NIR night vision system with significantly enhanced performance was introduced in the Mercedes S Class .
In German cars the processed image from the camera . When positioning the monitor in the vehicle, it is important to ensure that the monitor is as close as possible to the windshield and not too far removed from the driver's normal line of sight so that the driver does not have to divert his/her attention from the road and traffic for too long. Ergonomic tests featured the best results in relationship to read off time and distraction in an arrangement with the monitor in the instrument cluster.
2nd generation night vision systems New image processing procedures enable pedestrians to be reliably classified by reference to their typical outlines . This makes it possible not only to warn the driver acoustically but also still to highlight the detected pedestrian on the monitor in order to improve the driver's perception of a dangerous condition. This is particularly important in far infrared systems, because the image on account of its strange appearance is more difficult to interpret than a near infrared image.
This feature is important insofar as the : majority of fatal accidents involving pedestrians happens at night. In this way, such systems can help to significantly reduce nighttime accidents involving pedestrians. Systems with pedestrian recognition are now fitted as standard in both technologies in German vehicles.
The further development of head up display technologies offers the additional display of a warning when pedestrians are detected in the primary field of view. Displaying a warning symbol on the windshield represents and effective display format with minimal distractions. An alternative for simpler systems is a cost effective optical warning on the base of the windshield that displays the direction of the detected obstacle. These display formats would be a cost effective alternative for lower classes of vehicles. 3rd generation night vision systems New headlamp technologies in the meantime permit the omission of the image display, and as a result the driver is not distracted by looking at the display. A pedestrian detected by the image processing system can be lit or "flashed" with the aid of a small additional headlamp. This automatically directs the driver's attention towards the pedestrian, who now knows they have been detected.
New pixel light concepts with numerous high power LEDs whose light is diffracted by micro mirrors make it possible to create light cones of almost any shape and facilitate continuous driving on high beam. If a pedestrian or an oncoming vehicle is classified by the imaging system, the light/dark boundary is automatically lowered to such an extent that dazzling no longer occurs.
Application: On virtually all motor vehicles, the bodies have been designed and developed in such a way as to achieve the lowest possible drag coefficient values in order to reduce fuel consumption. Generally speaking, this trend has resulted in a gentle wedge shape which greatly restricts the driver's rear view when maneuvering. Obstacles are difficult to recognize. This also applies to obstacles beside the vehicle and objects in the driver's blind spot. Ultrasonic parking aids were initially developed in the past to improve the overview around the vehicle. Thanks to new algorithms and the inclusion of video technology, these systems have undergone further development into maneuvering aids through to automated parking systems.
A distinction is made between passive and active systems based on the system configuration. Passive systems warn or inform the driver about hazardous situations, while active systems intervene on a taskand situation specific basis and steer the vehicle, such as into a parking space.
Ultrasonic parking aid Parking aids with ultrasonic sensors support parking maneuvers. They monitor an area of approx. 20 cm to 250 cm behind and, if necessary, in front of the vehicle. Obstacles are detected and their distance to the vehicle is indicated by visual or acoustic signals.
Numerous vehicle manufacturers offer parking aids as optional equipment; in many premium vehicles they are now fitted as standard equipment. Systems which can also be adapted to older vehicles are offered for retrofitting.
System The parking aid essentially consists of ultrasonic sensors , and warning elements. The protection area is determined by the range and number of sensors and by their emission characteristic.
to six additional ultrasonic sensors in the : front bumper .
The system is activated automatically when reverse gear is engaged. In the case of systems with front end protection, the system is activated automatically when the vehicle speed drops below a threshold of approximately 15 km/h . During operation, the self test function ensures continuous monitoring of all system components.
Distance measurement The ultrasonic sensors emit ultrasonic pulses and receive the sound reflected by an obstacle. The piezoceramic element generates an analog electrical signal, which is evaluated in the sensor. The distance between the vehicle and the detected obstacles is derived from the propagation time between the ultrasonic pulse being emitted and the echo pulses being reflected back from obstacles .
Warning elements The warning elements display the distance from an obstacle. Their design is specific to the vehicle, and they usually provide for a combination of acoustic signal and optical display. Primarily LEDs, but also LCDs are currently used for optical displays.
In the case of vehicles with a display monitor in the center console area or in the instrument cluster, the vehicle can be shown together with the obstacles detected by the system, e.g. from a bird's eye view. This generally improves the driver's view of the situation.
Ultrasonic parking assistant: The parking assistant is based on the ultrasonic parking aid and is designed along evolutionary lines in stages. Each stage is a self contained function.
All the ultrasonic systems shown in the following are already in series production. Parallel parking Information providing parking assistant Information providing parking assistant After the system is activated by the driver, an ultrasonic sensor mounted on each side of the vehicle measures the length and depth of the parking gap as the vehicle drives past the gap . The parking assistant then issues the driver with a signal as to whether the parking gap is long enough, tight or too short. If there is an obstacle in the parking space, this is rejected. This requires the above mentioned sensors with a range of up to approximately 4.5 to 5.5 m.
Once the parking space has been measured, the determined geometry of the environment can be used to ascertain the optimal trajectory for the parking process. The parking assistant requires the signals from the steering angle sensor  for this purpose. During the parking process, the system can now give the driver a recommendation regarding how he or she should optimally turn the steering wheel in order to park in the space as smoothly as possible. During the parking operation, the trajectory is continuously recalculated and shown in a display. Figure 4a shows an example of a driving recommendation from the system.
to put the vehicle in reverse and control the vehicle's linear motion the parking assistant takes over the steering. When the parking process is done, the driver is notified accordingly.
1 Parked vehicle, 2 Parking vehicle, 3 Parking space boundary ,  4 Side detecting ultrasonic sensor, 5 Ultrasonic sensor in the rear area. a Measured depth of the parking space, l Length of the parking space. 1 1 a l 3 2 1 4 5 UKD0090 5Y
space is long enough. If the parking space : is short, the parking assistant decides on multi step parking, based on the length of the space and the vehicle's possible steering radius. Then the system prompts the driver to shift gears accordingly. Perpendicular parking Semi automated parking is not limited to the parallel parking functions described, but also permits parking in spaces perpendicular to the direction of travel .
As with parallel parking, the length of the parking space is measured as you drive by it. To do this, the corner of the vehicle on the left is also taken into account.
Before beginning the parking process, the vehicle moves forward until it can calculate a parking trajectory. Then, after reverse gear is engaged, the vehicle parks along the trajectory, which is continuously recalculated and corrected if necessary. The signals from the rear ultrasonic sensors are continuously factored into the parking maneuver. Due to the limited detection range of the ultrasonic sensors, the driver is responsible for making sure the entire length of the parking space is free of obstacles.
As with the previously described parking assistants for parallel parking, for this function there are also information providing and if the vehicle is equipped with electric power steering steering system versions.
1 Parking vehicle, 2 Left parked vehicle, 3 Right parked vehicle. A Right corner point of the left parked car, B Left corner point of the right parked car. SAE1216 2Y b c a 1 2 3 A B
Assistant for leaving a parking space: In principle, the parking aid can also be used for leaving parallel parking spaces. To do so, the system first moves the vehicle into an appropriate starting position, so that the maneuver can be done in one step. The driver is responsible for paying attention to the traffic and accelerating or braking at the right moment. Simply touching the steering wheel turns off the function.
Maneuvering assistant Traces of paint on parking garage pillars and walls testify to frequent, sometimes costly collisions with vehicles. The system for warning about objects next to the vehicle helps prevent that.
Ultrasonic sensors mounted on the front of the vehicle at the sides detect permanent obstacles in the vehicle surroundings at a slow driving speed . A bird's eye view of the situation can also be shown on the central display. This system was introduced to serial production in 2013.
Video systems Rearview camera Rearview cameras were already first introduced some time ago in Japan, but did not become prevalent in Europe due to the heavily distorted picture of the super wide angle lens. The breakthrough in Europe didn't come until there were systems to correct the image distortion. Today's systems have a wide angle camera installed in the rear end of the vehicle, usually in the recess of the handle to the trunk. The camera image appears in the center console display when driving in reverse. Newer systems with additional lines to help estimate the distance and display the predicted lane make it easier for the driver to maneuver . The camera is intended only to provide information and does not provide the driver with any warnings.
360deg all around visibility: The whole area around the vehicle can be detected using four super wide angle cameras installed around the vehicle . The fields of view of the individual cameras overlap in the shaded areas. The four individual images are converted into one overall image using the stitching method. Projecting the four images into an imaginary bowl structure makes it possible to provide the driver with a bird's eye view and a view from different directions of his or her own vehicle in the display.
rearview camera Video display with additional information displayed. The distance information is calculated from the optical parameters of the single video camera.
information of the ultrasonic sensor 1 Obstacle , 2 Distance assistance lines on the 50 cm grid, calculated from measured values of the ultrasonic sensors, 3 Trajectory at maximum steering angle. 1 2 3 3 SAE1222 1Y
Fusion of video and ultrasound : technology Further improvements can be achieved through data fusion of the ultrasound system's signals with the video camera's signals. For example, in addition to the lane information, distance information from the ultrasound system can be displayed in the image from the mono rearview camera as well, which cannot be used for measuring distance . By doing so, the driver receives even more meaningful information about the area by the rear of the vehicle.
More recent development steps Further functions and options have been created through the further development of semi automated parking by using intelligent image processing algorithms . The combination of intelligent camera systems with ultrasonic sensors form the basis for the automated parking and maneuvering assistance systems outlined in the following.
Parking maneuver assistant  Parking maneuver assistant  Further development of the steering parking assistant has the vehicle now controlling linear motion as well. To initiate the parking maneuver, the driver needs only to put the gear in reverse; the system handles the rest. This system was launched into series production in 2014.
Remote controlled parking assistant Remote controlled parking assistant , the driver simply has to take their finger off the screen and the car will stop immediately. Home zone park assist Home zone park assist In parking garages or parking lots with reserved parking spaces in the home environment it will in future be possible to teach the car a parking maneuver from a defined parked position to the driver's own parking space by driving the route and maneuvering the car into the parking space. The driver can then leave the car in the parked position and start the car by actuating a remote control as described above. The car then automatically drives the taught course to the parking space and parks up there. If the driver wants to use their car again, they can fetch it again from the garage with the same remote control. The car will then stop in the original parked position.
Highly automated, remote controlled Highly automated, remote controlled parking This function is used above all for maneuvering into and out of tight garages or parking spaces. Because it is in principle possible to park a car without the need for a driver, the user can start the parking operation in front of the garage with a remote control, an intelligent remote key, or their smartphone by touching an operating element. The car then drives under automated guidance into the garage. The driver does not need to be present for this. This function calls for very robust environment recognition and high safety requirements.
Autonomous parking  Autonomous parking  A car that parks autonomously was presented to the public for the first time in 2007 as part of the American "Urban Challenge", a competition for automated driving in an urban environment. Here the car was parked at the entrance to a parking lot. The car found a free parking space itself and parked in it.
With this new function too the car is : parked in a predefined drop off area in front of a parking garage or a basement garage. For the subsequent parking maneuver the driver gets out of the car and selects the "Find parking space" function on their smartphone. The the car drives under fully automated guidance into the parking garage, finds a parking space itself, and parks in it. The same operating procedure can be used to fetch the car from the garage. For driving and maneuvering the car uses its own on board sensor technology .
Such systems can have a significant influence on the infrastructure of future parking garages: The vehicles can be parked much more tightly since large spaces do not have to be kept for getting in and out. The storey height can be reduced. Long stay parked vehicles can be "blocked in".
Networking with the "Cloud",  Networking with the "Cloud",  Connected Parking Connected Parking Looking for a parking space involves driving unnecessarily long distances. The resulting fuel consumption and exhaust emissions add up to a huge environmental impact.
Function: Like the basic cruise control system that has been available as a standard feature for quite some time, Adaptive Cruise Control .
Design and function Adaptive cruise control is a convenience system that relieves the driver of routine tasks, but not of his/her responsibility to maintain control of the vehicle. This is why the driver can override this function at any time through intervention or deactivation .
1 Engine control unit, 2 Radar sensor control unit, 3 Active brake intervention via  driving dynamics control  , 6 Sensors.
There are also ACC systems that work with laser beams in the infrared range .
Course setting To ensure reliable ACC operation no matter what the situation e.g. also on curves/ bends it is essential that the vehicles traveling ahead can be allocated to the correct lane.
Setting options The driver inputs the required speed and the required time gap; the time gap available to the driver ranges from 1 to 2 s. The time gap to the vehicle in front is calculated from the radar signals and compared with the required time gap specified by the driver. If the time gap is shorter than the required gap, the ACC system responds in a manner appropriate to the traffic situation by initially reducing engine torque, and only if necessary by automatically braking the vehicle. If the required time gap is exceeded, the vehicle accelerates until either the speed of the vehicle ahead or the desired speed set by the driver is reached.
Engine intervention Engine intervention Cruise control is run via the electronic engine performance control system . This system allows the vehicle to be accelerated to the required speed or, if an obstacle appears, to be decelerated by reducing the drive torque.
Brake intervention Brake intervention If the deceleration caused by engine control intervention is insufficient, the vehicle must be braked. For passenger cars the driving dynamics control is sufficient. Usually, this also involves the available retarder or engine brake for wearfree deceleration.
UAE0733 3E Engine management Radar sensor control unit Sensors for yaw rate, lateral acceleration, wheel speed, and steering angle ECUs Vehicle motion Radar sensor Object detection Object selection Distance controller Brake Transmission Engine Drivingdynamics control system Transmission control
lated by the controller is limited nowa : days to approx. 2 to 3 m/s2. Should this be insufficient due to the current traffic situation , a visual and audible signal is issued to the driver indicating that he or she must assume control. The driver must then initiate the corresponding braking deceleration via the standard brake. The ACC does not include safety functions such as emergency braking.
If necessary, with ACC activated, the stabilizing systems Antilock Brake System or driving dynamics control are activated in the usual manner. Depending on the parameterization of ACC, stabilizing interventions from the Antilock Brake System or driving dynamics control cause ACC to shut off.
Control algorithms Control modules As a general principle, the control system for cars as well as for trucks consists of three control modules.
Cruise control Cruise control If the radar sensor has not detected any vehicles in front, the system maintains the vehicle's speed at the cruising speed set by the driver.
Tracking control Tracking control The radar sensor has detected vehicles in front. Control essentially maintains the time gap to the nearest vehicle at a constant setting.
Cornering control Cornering control When negotiating tight bends, the radar sensor can "lose sight" of the vehicle in front because of the limited width of its field of vision. Until the vehicle comes in sight of the radar again, or until the system is switched to normal cruise control, special measures come into effect. Depending on the vehicle manufacturer, the speed, for example, is kept constant, current lateral acceleration is adapted or ACC is switched off.
the slip lane and continues rapid accel : eration to change quickly to the fast lane. Electronic structure Apart from the data transmitted by sensors can take place both in the driving dynamics control unit and in a guidance computer or in the ACC control unit itself.
Adjustment The radar sensor is fitted in the frontal area of the vehicle. Its radar lobe scans are aligned relative to the vehicle longitudinal axis. This is done by means of the adjustment screws in the mounting area of the sensor. If it is moved out of alignment by physical force, e.g. deformation of the mounting due to accident damage or any other effect, realignment must be carried out. Small degrees of misalignment are automatically corrected by the permanently active alignment routines implemented in the software. If manual realignment is required, this is indicated to the driver.
Area of application and functional expansions Use in passenger cars The use of Adaptive Cruise Control is bound to the availability of driving dynamics control. This is a requirement for active brake intervention without action on the part of the driver.
of handling a situation where several vehicles equipped with ACC are driving in a convoy .
means that the focus during configuration is placed more on economy than on sports and comfort. Fuel consumption and wear must be at least as good with ACC as with an average driver.
As a general principle, the same type of ACC system can be used for buses, trucks and tractor units. The requirements with regard to drive and braking systems, manual, semi automatic or fully automatic transmissions are also very similar in buses and trucks. Only with the configuration of the system are there heightened requirements in buses with regard to comfort.
System design: System design The system architecture of ACC for commercial vehicles is barely different at all from that of ACC for passenger cars.
However, the range of the sensors can be shorter owing to the lower speeds involved. The environmental and servicelife requirements imposed on the components in this respect are much higher. ACC control is configured in commercial vehicles for optimum consumption and wear performance. Thus, for example, the service brake system is activated only when the available retarder is no longer able to decelerate the vehicle in the manner requested by the ACC controller. Brake wear caused by ACC is therefore for the most part at the same level as that caused by an average driver. The same applies to fuel consumption, in which case a positive effect compared with an average driver can also be discerned thanks to ACC.
As well as these ACC systems, there are for commercial vehicles also predictive ACC systems which, on the basis of route topology information that is learned or stored in maps, optimize the driving speed in such a way as to achieve the lowest possible fuel consumption. The systems achieve this for example by no longer accelerating ahead of humps in the road or on downhill stretches with a subsequent uphill gradient by better utilizing the kinetic energy through increased speed. The proven savings are, even when compared with good drivers, in the range of 5 to 10 %.
In some countries, e.g., the USA and Canada, there are even ACC systems which on account of the simpler brake architecture influence solely the engine torque or the continuous braking torque. The driver must therefore intervene manually more often.
ACCplus First generation ACC systems had limitations in their range of functions resulting from the limited functionality of sensors and actuators. The limited object sensing range and the limited horizontal resolution capacity only permitted operation above 30 km/h. Therefore ACC could not initially be used down to low speeds and at a standstill. The ACCplus system and improved detection properties, and thus permits braking to a standstill and restarting by driver intervention. Pressing the accelerator pedal within a predetermined time limit is sufficient to reactivate the system. Thanks to its greater reliability in destination selection and its even better ability to detect objects at close range, ACC can now also be used in traffic jam situations.
ACC with low speed following During low speed following in order to provide an exact measurement of objects in front of the entire vehicle.
It operates in a speed range of 0 to 200 km/h, brakes the vehicle to a standstill, and automatically restarts within a predetermined time limit.
Sensor data fusion with a video camera Object measurement and object classification can be performed by means of sensor data fusion with a video camera. This enables robust control over the  vehicle with regard to stationary objects. By combining with video sensor technology, it will be possible for low speed following to perform full linear guidance at all speed ranges and also in urban traffic in the future . ACC has also provided the basis for developing assistance systems which automatically intervene in critical driving situations to avoid accidents or to mitigate the consequences of accidents. Further developments are geared towards automatic evasive maneuvering by automatic steering intervention.
The navigation system determines the position of the vehicle and estimates the expected path that the vehicle will travel . Examples of this include the road class, the geometric shape of the road, expressway exits and on ramps, speed limits and the gradient of the road. Manufacturer specific protocols or the ADASIS standard  using CAN bus are used to provide the electronic horizon to the ECU.
The ACC system can access this information to improve its function. For example, the predictive course of the road can be used to more reliably assign oncoming radar specifically to a lane . The acceleration of the vehicle can be prevented when approaching an expressway exit if an oncoming radar object is lost when switching to the deceleration lane. The set speed can be reduced  automatically before coming to a very tight curve.
In the future, the increased enhancement of the digital map with data and improvement in data quality will enable innovative assistance functions in combination with the ACC system, including predictive, fully automated specification of the set speed. The driver no longer has to enter the intended speed manually; the ACC system determines it automatically by communicating with the navigation system.
This allows the ACC system to implement predictive driving strategies in combination with the engine control unit, which minimize CO2 emissions. If the ACC "sees" a speed limit or curve in advance via the electronic horizon, the  vehicle can roll or coast to it with optimal fuel consumption. The gradient of the road is also taken into account when initiating the rolling or coasting procedure. Networking with the cloud The higher the ACC function's degree of automation, the greater the requirements are on the timeliness, precision and  reliability of the data in the electronic horizon. To increase the data quality of the digital map, the vehicle itself will contribute to recording street environment data using its sensors. The function: Information such as traffic signs or the cornering speed are recorded by the vehicle's sensors, supplemented with data from the navigation system via mobile communications. In the central server, the incoming signals from many vehicles are processed, compiled and prepared for retrieval. The server information can be requested by vehicles with navigation systems. This ensures that the most  recent information is always available. The incoming data from the server is applied to the local navigation map as new knowledge and provided to the ACC system immediately via the electronic horizon.
Rearview camera system: Function Modern vehicles often offer the driver only a limited view of the vehicle's immediate surroundings. Increasingly smaller side and rear windows, combined with a vehicle shape that is strongly influenced by aerodynamics and pedestrian protection, is making safe and precise maneuvering difficult. The rearview camera system assists the driver when reversing by displaying a real time image of the rear driving area in the radio or navigation system display. The rearview camera system offers the driver when reversing an unobstructed view of the vehicle's immediate surroundings .
termine in real time whether the way is clear. Optionally, the vehicle's path can be shown dynamically on the camera image with the aid of colored lines. These display the vehicle's trajectory according to the current steering wheel position and indicate when the steering wheel must be turned. This makes accurate maneuvering possible.
Multi camera system: Features Parking and maneuvering are among the activities most likely to be associated with accidents, so every centimeter counts. The multi camera system offers the driver a 360deg surround view to ensure easy, safe, and comfortable parking and maneuvering. The option to switch between perspectives makes it possible to line up precisely with lines, curbs, and walls. Safe maneuvering is possible through better orientation and visibility of the vehicle's complete surroundings, including obstacles and curbs.
Properties of the multi camera system The 3D surround view of the multi camera system offers various advantages thanks to its highly complex video based object detection. The 360deg view and the automatic, real time tracking shot always provide the driver seamlessly with the best perspective. In addition, the multi camera system generates a realistic, animated 3D vehicle model that provides the driver with an impressive, detailed image of the vehicle's surroundings. Moreover, the 3D visualization automatically adapts while maneuvering to an environment model based on sensor data fusion to provide the best view of critical situations. This makes automated parking and parking assist functions easier and safer. The modular approach of this multi camera system covers the various performance requirements with only one ECU, near range cameras with a resolution of one to two megapixels, and optional ultrasonic sensors. Light system variants integrate two to four near range cameras, depending on the resolution.
Automated and assisted parking functions can be robustly realized with the aid of the multi camera system since sensor data fusion increases the understanding of the vehicle's surroundings and thus improves parking functions like the parking assistant or the home zone parking assistant. The multi camera system also supports the driver when parking and maneuvering with a trailer. It simplifies coupling the trailer by providing a specific view of the trailer tow hitch and supports the driver when reversing with the trailer by taking over lateral guidance of the vehicle.
Operating principle of the  multi camera system The multi camera system consists of four near range cameras. One faces forward, another rearward, while the two side cameras are integrated in the exterior mirrors. Each with an aperture angle of 190deg, they capture the vehicle's complete surroundings. The system also includes an ECU, which merges the camera images to form a 360deg view and if desired combines them with distance information from ultrasonic sensors.
Using these data, the system generates a dynamic 3D wireframe around the virtual vehicle model; the shape of that frame is adjusted to match to match the changing surroundings. The real time images from the near range cameras are projected onto the wireframe. In contrast to 2D systems, this method allows objects that rise up to be represented more realistically.
with the multi camera system with four near range cameras 1 Detection range of the front camera,  rearview camera, and cameras in the exterior mirrors, 2 Detection range of the optionally  used ultrasonic sensors.
Digital exterior mirror system Large side mirrors on commercial vehicles are an extremely important safety feature and are essential for ensuring the driver has a good rear view. But, due to their size, they restrict forward visibility and also generate high aerodynamic drag. The digital exterior mirror system replaces the large side mirrors with two monitors integrated in the driver's cab and two exterior cameras that are mounted above the driver's cab . The aerodynamic design reduces aerodynamic drag and with it fuel consumption. At the same time, the system increases safety by significantly improving the driver's all around visibility and reducing the blind spot.
Road sign recognition: Features Another function that makes use of the information from the video sensor is roadsign recognition. This system is capable of recognizing and interpreting road signs  is prohibited, and also no entry. Stop, right of way, and road works signs are also recognized. Road sign recognition also classifies relevant supplementary signs, such as time limits, signs applicable only to specific vehicle types, and turn arrows. The system reliably detects road signs, whether they are sited on actual signs, variable message systems or gantries. Road sign recognition presupposes that the sample designs to be recognized have previously been taught into the image processing computer.
When the system detects a relevant road sign, it shows this as an icon in the instrument cluster's graphic display on a stretch where such maneuvers are prohibited and when stop and no entry signs have been overlooked.
Reliable road sign recognition is now possible at speeds of up to 160 km/h and also in conditions of rain and road spray. Application In assistance functions Recognized road signs are increasingly being used in a variety of assistance functions. For example, navigation maps can be updated with recognized road signs and the adaptive cruise control system can in a further expansion stage maintain the vehicle's speed at the identified speed limit.
Driver drowsiness detection: Problem Fatigue and microsleep at the wheel are often the cause of serious accidents. However, the initial signs of fatigue can be detected before a critical situation arises. The steering behavior can provide an indication of the onset of driver drowsiness. Operating principle Using information from the steering angle sensor, the drowsiness detection algorithm analyzes the driver's steering behavior and recognizes changes that occur over the course of long trips and in response to driver fatigue. Typical signs of waning concentration are phases during which the driver is barely steering, combined with slight, yet quick and abrupt steering interventions to keep the car on track. Already small steering deviations that are barely perceptible to the driver are typical signs of waning concentration. Based on the frequency of these steering corrections and other parameters, among them the length of the trip, blinking behavior, and the time of day, the function calculates a fatigue index. If this index exceeds a certain value, an icon such as a flashing coffee cup in the instrument cluster alerts the driver to take a break.
This drowsiness detection system has already successfully been on the market for a few years. Because it is purely a software solution in combination with the steering angle sensor, the function can be integrated with minimal effort and outlay in existing vehicle platforms. The function helps to fulfill the upcoming legal requirements.
Rear cross traffic warning Features Backing out of a parking space  can often be a challenge, especially when the driver's view of the traffic passing behind their own vehicle is obstructed. Rear cross traffic warning makes this reversing parking maneuver easier by warning the driver of crossing vehicles. Rear cross traffic warning can detect crossing vehicles up to 50 m away.
Operating principle of rear  cross traffic warning The system utilizes two corner radar sensors in the rear of the vehicle, Figure 6 shows the detection range. They measure and interpret the distance, speed, and anticipated driving path of detected vehicles in the cross traffic.
When the function detects other vehicles crossing from the left or right at a distance of up to 50 meters, it warns the driver acoustically or visually of an imminent danger of collision.
Turn collision warning  for trucks Features Driving heavy commercial vehicles can be a challenge, especially at intersections. Cyclists and pedestrians are particularly at risk in such situations. Turn collision warning promptly detects pedestrians and cyclists in the commercial vehicle's blind spot , warns the driver acoustically or visually of potential dangers before the vehicle turns, and thereby helps to avoid accidents. The side radar sensors can not only facilitate this function, but can also more than satisfy the legal requirements.
Operating principle of turn : collision warning Radar sensors installed on the side of the vehicle promptly detect pedestrians and cyclists on the co driver's side. These sensors cover the entire area alongside the vehicle and trailer, from the immediate area in front of the vehicle reaching into the intersection to just behind the end of the trailer. If the side mounted radar sensors detect other road users in these areas, the system outputs a visual signal to notify the driver of their presence. In this situation, the vehicle's predicted route is tracked against the road users detected. If a person is situated in the critical area alongside the vehicle and the driver initiates a turning maneuver, the driver receives a further visual or acoustic warning. This enables the driver to react in good time to avoid a collision with a pedestrian or cyclist. The system helps to increase road safety and prevent accidents between heavy commercial vehicles and more vulnerable road users. With these side mounted radar sensors, the legal requirements for protecting pedestrians and cyclists during turning maneuvers contained in regulation UN ECE R151 for "blind spot information systems" can be more than satisfied.
Moving off information system for heavy commercial vehicles Features Maintaining a clear view in heavy commercial vehicles can be a challenge, especially in urban traffic. Cyclists and pedestrians are particularly at risk in such situations. The moving off information system helps to avoid collisions. It detects objects and people within close range of the front of the vehicle , issues the driver with acoustic or haptic warnings of potential dangers, and therefore helps to prevent accidents. The side radar sensors can not only facilitate this function, but can also more than satisfy the legal requirements.
Operating principle of the moving off information system The moving off information system is a cornerstone for integrative, near range safety functions and helps to avoid collisions with other road users. It provides the driver with an assistance system that detects people and obstacles close to the front of the vehicle in situations involving moving off and low speed maneuvers.
Side mounted radar sensors at the front of the cab constantly monitor the vehicle's immediate surrounding in such situations. If the sensors detect objects or road users and recognize a potential risk of collision, the system promptly provides the driver with an acoustic or haptic warning. This enables the driver to react swiftly and brake in good time. The visual or acoustic warning ceases when there is no further risk of collision. With these side mounted radar sensors, the legal requirements of the General Safety Regulation can be more than satisfied.
Wrong way driver warning: Motivation In Europe there are more than 4,000 accidents every year caused by wrong way drivers on expressways/highways. This amounts to around 5 % of all the fatal accidents on expressways/highways. The aim of cloud based wrong way driver warning is to avoid the often serious accidents involving wrong way drivers on expressways/highways. This function thus makes an important contribution to increasing road safety.
Technical implementation In order to reach a very large number of road users as quickly as possible with the service, an approach was chosen which called for solely connectivity and GPS , which contains the coordinates of all the relevant highway entrance ramps and the necessary algorithms for performing the steps described in the following.
Functioning principle As soon as a networked vehicle reaches the area of a high entrance ramp, the end device starts to send the position and acceleration data in one second intervals to the back end. Here the actual direction of travel is compared with the permitted direction of travel. The data required for this purpose are available in the cloud in the form of a map with direction of travel details. A warning is sent if the two sets of information clash. This warning is sent to all the connected vehicles. Only then is a check made in the end device as to whether the individual vehicle is affected by the warning and this warning must be displayed to the user accordingly. It is up to the customer to organize the nature and the content of the warning. Bosch in its proposal is orientated to the recommended actions of the German motoring association ADAC.
Performance In this way, it is possible to warn not only the wrong way driver themselves but also quite specifically those road users who are driving towards the wrong way driver. With a warning time of under 10 seconds with a "true positive rate" of 93 % this solution is more efficient than other approaches to preventing wrong way driving incidents. _________________________________ References UN ECE R151: Blind Spot Information System for the Detection of Bicycles.
Drifting from the lane unintentionally : frequently leads to serious accidents. It is caused for the most part by the driver being distracted or tired .
Assistance systems that afford the driver further lateral guidance support on expressways/highways with roadworks  are currently in development.
Lane departure warning Lane detection Lane departure warning systems use video cameras to detect the lanes ahead of the vehicle and can have both mono and stereo video designs. A stereo video sensor offers advantages when the road surface exhibits more pronounced gradients, as is typical for example of many country roads. Here the stereo video sensor helps to estimate the surface profile. Knowledge of the surface profile simplifies in the next stage the detection of lane markings and extends the detection range. There are no advantages for lane detection on expressways/highways as here only slight changes in the surface profile are permitted by statutory requirements. In good weather conditions and with good lane markings, the range is in the region of up to 100 m.
mark the course of the lane which have : been calculated by the image processing computer. In order to detect a line, the luminance signal . The lane covered by the system vehicle can be detected on the basis of the limiting lane markings. A brief absence of lane markings can be compensated for in the currently available systems. No lane assistance can be offered if the markings are absent over wide areas.
The lane detection algorithm of the camera detects and classifies all the common variants of lane markings up to a distance of around 60 meters can be detected by the camera.
Research is currently being conducted into systems which are intended to detect the roadsides even without markings on the basis of the surface structure and color. The attributes of the last road driven on are also utilized as models. When such systems are market ready in a few years, lane assistance systems will also be available on unmarked roads.
Driver warning A warning for the driver can be derived on the basis of the detected lanes in the event of the vehicle drifting out of lane. Different forms of warning are conceivable here. The first systems used an acoustic warning from the vehicle speaker in the form of a warning sound or "rumblestrip rattling"; a stereo sound can additionally convey a direction here. However, the systems that have become the most widely used since then feature warning the driver via the haptic sensory channel by vibrating the steering wheel or subjecting the steering to a slight counter torque. The advantage of issuing the warning through the steering wheel lies in the driver directly associating the danger with the movements on the steering wheel.
a) Camera image with search lines, b) Detailed view with search line, c) Luminance signal .
Lane keeping support: Supporting interventions Lane keeping support is a functional enhancement of lane departure warning in that it not only warns the driver against drifting unintentionally from the lane, but also actively supports him in maintaining course. If the vehicle drifts too far from the lane, lane keeping support makes a course correction, either by means of an active steering intervention or an asymmetrical braking intervention. In this way, the system supports the driver in keeping his vehicle on course and at the same time helps to increase road safety by avoiding accidents caused by drifting unintentionally from the lane.
However, lane keeping support itself cannot assume full lateral guidance of a vehicle, but is instead intended to support the driver in maintaining course. The system does not relieve the driver of his responsibility to follow and react to the traffic conditions attentively and to drive the vehicle consciously and deliberately. A system intervention can be overridden by the driver at any time.
To prevent misuse, the lane keeping support system is fitted with a device which monitors whether the driver has both hands on the steering wheel and is actively steering the vehicle. If the driver is driving with no hands, an instruction is promptly issued to the driver to take control of the vehicle and the assistance afforded by lane keeping support is terminated with an accompanying visual or acoustic warning.
Applications Lane keeping support is designed primarily for use on expressways/highways and well developed highways. Like lane departure warning, lane keeping support is dependent on detecting lanes ahead of the vehicle. Short term failures in lane detection, caused for example by hidden or faded lane markings, are compensated for by the system. However, lane keeping support is deactivated if no lane information is received for an extended period of time.
their destination safely and comfortably. Lane keeping support actively steers the vehicle in the center of its lane. Operating principle of lane centering assist Lane centering assist uses a video camera to detect lane boundaries including road markings or structural boundaries alongside the vehicle and compare these with the position of the vehicle in the lane. Then the system aligns the vehicle via the electrohydraulic steering system to keep it on track, making active interventions to ensure that it stays in the center of its lane. The function can be activated while driving and if necessary can be overridden by the driver at any time. In this way, the driver remains responsible for the vehicle.
The smart combination of components makes driving heavy commercial vehicles safer and brings a noticeable improvement in driving comfort. Damage to the load caused by jerky steering maneuvers is avoided.
Emergency lane keeping : support for heavy trucks Application Long, monotonous stretches of road can cause drivers to become tired and inattentive. On occasion, this can make them unintentionally drift over the lane markings. Things get particularly dangerous when unprotected, steep embankments or verges line the edge of the road. If the driver starts to drift away from the drivable road surface and fails to react promptly, emergency lane keeping support actively steers the vehicle back into the correct lane.
Operating principle of emergency lane keeping support Emergency lane keeping support uses a camera to detect the edge of the road, i.e., the boundary of the surface that can be safely driven on, and compares this with the vehicle's position. The function intervenes if it determines that the vehicle is failing to maintain a defined minimum distance to the boundary of the road surface. Emergency lane keeping support makes a noticeable steering correction in the opposite direction with the electrohydraulic steering system to keep the vehicle on track and thereby avoid the serious consequences of the vehicle departing the road. It increases safety through early correction of driving mistakes.
Roadworks assistant Applications When roadworks are taking place on the roads, there is often very little space between the vehicles in the adjacent lane and the crash barriers. Roadworks assistant and bottleneck/constriction assistant are further developments of lane keeping support. In addition to lane markings, these systems also detect raised objects and obstacles and take them into consideration in lateral guidance . The help drivers maintain a lateral safety distance to vehicles in the adjacent lane and safety curbs or crash barriers when driving in a narrow lane.
The roadworks assistant supports the driver in negotiating roadworks on expressways/highways and thus extends the lane keeping support system to include this special scenario.
Detection of lane restrictions: Because roadworks are more complex in their structure than the typical expressway/highway environment, the roadworks assistant detects roadworks specific lane restrictions . It also ensures that an early warning is issued to the driver and an automatic brake intervention is effected if there is not enough space for the vehicle to be able to pass. As with lane keeping support, the intensity of the steering and brake interventions is restricted. The interventions can be easily overridden by the driver so that potentially motiveless interventions remain fully non critical and thus without consequences.
The feasibility of the functional idea was demonstrated by the implementation of an in vehicle prototype as part of the publicly funded UR:BAN project concluded in 2016 . The bottleneck/ constriction assistant is currently in the advance development stage. The date of a series launch is still open.
tant visualization of calculation results 1 Inflatable obstacle , 4 Available road width, 5 Predicted corridor.
Typical cell sizes range between 10 cm : and 20 cm. If an object exists in the system vehicle's surrounding environment, the affected grid cells are marked as occupied. Dynamic objects are pictured by way of object models with various function related attributes .
Evaluation of the traffic situation The situation analysis must make an assessment of the collision risk in accordance with the planned trajectory of the vehicle and the moving objects, and incorporating the stationary environment. Criticality measurements which are used in the function module to detect critical situations where action is required are typically calculated for this purpose. A typical criticality measurement of this type is the braking time reserve , a collision mitigating system response is authorized.
culation results by the bottleneck/constriction assistant in a test scenario with a passable bottleneck/constriction while using typical test equipment codes the available road width in the bottleneck/constriction. The stripes on the level show the predicted corridor for the vehicle.
351/2012 of 23 April 2012 implementing Regulation No. 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards type approval requirements for the installation of lane departure warning systems in motor vehicles.
ways the colliding vehicles are typically driving at similar speeds, i.e., are traveling parallel or slowly passing . In the second case, a lane change is made in front of a vehicle that is approaching from the rear at high speed. A typical outcome here is a rear end collision.
Subfunctions which can address the two types of accident mentioned are described in the following. The functions described are available for trucks and motorcycles as well as for passenger cars. The principle of operation is the same, regardless of the vehicle type.
Environment detection There are various sensor concepts, differing in terms of costs and performance. In order to avoid this type of accident, only the area directly next to or just behind the system vehicle is relevant. What all the sensor concepts have in common is that the range to the rear extends only a short distance beyond the rear end of the vehicle.
There are systems that utilize the ultrasonic sensors .
Sensor related challenges arise in driving : maneuvers that involve high transverse dynamics in such a way that incorrect object measurements and consequently false system warnings are avoided.
In a first stage, only slightly perceptible driver information is provided in the form of a side specific activation of visual symbols or light elements in the side mirrors. If the driver additionally signals a lanechange request , the visual display can flash, followed by a supplementary acoustic warning or even a slight intervention in lateral guidance. The latter steering intervention can actively prevent or impede the lane change. Automatic steering intervention can be easily overridden and is comparable in terms of intervention intensity with that of lane keeping support.
Lane change assistant As described above, the blind spot assistant, on account of the limited sensor field of vision to the rear, cannot react to vehicles approaching at high speed from the rear . Here, the function of the lane change assistant supplements the range of functions of the blind spot assistant, i.e., simultaneously monitors the space to the sides of the vehicle as well. Environment detection In contrast to the blind spot assistant, exclusively midor long range radars are used here; these are mounted on a passenger car at the rear corners below the bumper. If a truck is fitted with a lanechange, this is typically positioned under the side mirror.
In particular for passenger cars the radar antenna radiation pattern is typically set out in such a way that the radar sensor with a smaller radar lobe of low range also covers the area next to the vehicle. The radar sensors use attain a range of up to 100 m to the rear.
Response model Unlike with the blind spot assistant, an object prediction is now conducted on the basis of the object list created in environment detection. The system therefore measures whether at a given system vehicle speed the object approaching from the rear would enter into a critical situation, i.e., would have to brake sharply, if the system vehicle changes lane. The braking time reserve , the lane change is assessed as critical and the escalation cascade passes, as with the blind spot assistant, into the second stage. The actual response model now corresponds to that of the blind spot assistant.
Evasive steering support: Features Evasive steering support actively supports the driver during a critical evasive maneuver by means of a supporting steering torque. The helps the driver to circumnavigate an obstacle in order to avoid an accident. The maximum steering angle is reached faster with the assistance of evasive steering support.
Evasive steering support becomes active when the system detects an impending collision and the driver initiates an evasive maneuver. Once the driver begins steering, the system assists the driver with torque interventions in the power steering in order to guide the vehicle around the obstacle .
Using the data from the video camera and radar sensor, the system instantaneously computes a suitable path, taking into account distance, width and offset of the vehicle traveling in front. The collected data from the radar and the camera are merged in an ECU for a better and more robust understanding of the scene.
Further developments Automation of the lane change operation particularly on expressways/highways is conceivable with the above mentioned lane change assistant. Such systems are currently in development.
Here the system indicates to the driver the possibility of a safe lane change maneuver provided the system vehicle is following another slower vehicle. The driver enables the maneuver and can gently place his or her hands on the steering wheel. The system performs the lane change automatically. In combination with Adaptive Cruise Control vehicle.
Since the radar sensor monitors the traffic behind the vehicle, such a maneuver can only be initiated if there is no risk of a side collision. This significantly increases overall safety. Most of the accidents that currently occur due to driver error when changing lanes could thereby be avoided.
Braking for an unobservant driver who fails to brake adequately or does not brake at all SFS0045 4E 1916 Driver assistance systems Emergency braking systems in longitudinal traffic Emergency brake assist and automatic emergency braking A significant number of road accidents are the result of collisions between vehicles driving in the same direction, i.e., rearend collisions. Driver assistance systems which can avoid such accidents or at least mitigate their consequences have been in series production for some years now. A simple feature is the brake assistant . Systems that use sensor technology to observe and interpret the vehicle's surroundings have a particularly high potential . This enables such a system to make the necessary anticipatory intervention in vehicle guidance in order for example to avoid an accident with emergency braking.
Environment detection Environment detection To be able to avoid rear end collisions, it is necessary to observe the vehicle traveling in front and its movement. If the system detects that a collision is imminent, it can take appropriate action, for example by issuing a warning to the driver or by performing emergency braking.
Various sensors are suitable for observing the vehicle environment. Their range and sensing range constitute an important function relevant feature. The required look ahead distance of the sensors is derived above all from the speed range in which the function is to be active. Radar sensors are used predominantly used for long ranges which are required at high driving speeds. Mono and stereo video sensors typically achieve medium look ahead distances. Lidar sensors can be used for both medium distances and close range.
Several sensors are frequently combined for a automatic emergency braking system. This offers two advantages: Firstly, the strengths of the individual measurement concepts complement each other, providing for a more accurate measurement of vehicles traveling in front. Secondly, system reliability is enhanced in that possible faults in individual sensors can be detected. In particular, unjustified system responses can be avoided. It is also possible, albeit with a loss in perEmergency braking systems
Attributes of objects traveling in front such as position, speed, acceleration, and object size and type are assessed on the basis of the environment sensor data and taking into account the motion of the driver's own vehicle. These object attributes are then used to evaluate the traffic situation with regard to its criticality. Evaluation of the traffic situation Evaluation of the traffic situation Different measures have become established that describe how critical the current traffic situation is, i.e., how probable it is that a collision with a vehicle traveling in front is imminent can be effected more rapidly.
Warning The driver can be warned in the event of a heightened collision risk. A warning is suitable to force the driver into a tried andtested response, especially if he has not yet recognized the danger. An accident can thus be avoided by the driver himself if the advance warning time is long enough. However, when configuring a warning function, it is important not to set the advance warning time at too long; in such a case the warning would frequently be issued already in easy to control, non critical situations and would thus be perceived to be unjustified.
Braking jerk The braking jerk constitutes a further warning escalation stage. Here the brake system is automatically activated for a brief period and then released again immediately. This has two advantages: Firstly, the driver is warned by haptics of the danger; secondly, the driving speed is already slightly reduced.
Partial braking Partial braking works along similar lines to the braking jerk. Here a slight deceleration is automatically set, but unlike the braking jerk is not released again immediately. Brake assistant Frequently the driver will react to the critical situation by initiating a braking operation that is too weak to avoid the accident. In this event the system can boost the braking force requested by the driver so as to bring the vehicle to a stop in good time before the obstacle and avoid the accident.
can prevent a rear end collision: DAE1437 1Y 1918 Driver assistance systems Full braking If the system responses described above are not sufficient or the driver fails to react appropriately to avoid the imminent collision, the above described criticality measurements do not decrease sufficiently the situation therefore remains critical. In this case, automatic full braking is initiated at the last moment. A possible criterion for activating emergency braking is for example a "time to brake" which is virtually zero or negative. Automatic full braking will frequently prevent an accident entirely, but at least will greatly reduce the impact speed.
Regulations and standards Regulations and standards Emergency braking systems for passenger cars Since 2014 automatic emergency braking when driving in the same direction has been part of the Euro NCAP assessment . Emergency braking systems are assessed by reference to standardized collision scenarios which are recreated on a test track. Here, both the avoidance of collisions by an emergency braking system and a reduction of the impact speed are positively assessed. The effectiveness of the emergency braking system installed in each case finally affects the number of NCAP stars that a vehicle can achieve.
Emergency braking systems for commercial vehicles An automatic emergency braking system .
DAE1438Y: Emergency braking systems 1919 Statutory requirements Statutory requirements With the front radar sensor and optionally the multifunction camera the legal requirements of UN ECE R131 regarding the Advanced Emergency Braking System  and a large number of regional legal requirements can be satisfied.
Maneuver emergency braking When maneuvering in tight and complex driving situations and when attempting to maneuver the car into a parking space, maneuver emergency braking prevents the vehicle from bumping into posts, pillars, and neighboring vehicles.
Operating principle of maneuver emergency braking The assist function constantly monitors the vehicle's surroundings by means of ultrasonic sensors. Using steering angle and driving speed, the system calculates the car's intended path and identifies any obstacles that could get in the way while maneuvering into the parking space . In the event of an imminent collision, the assist function automatically applies the brakes promptly until the car comes to a stop, thereby preventing dents or scratches.
DAE1439Y: 1920 Driver assistance systems Automatic emergency braking for unprotected road users Active pedestrian protection Motivation Motivation The protection of vulnerable road users, particularly pedestrians, has increasingly taken center stage in recent years. Initially this increased focus resulted in the improvement of passive safety systems for pedestrian protection . Now, increasingly, active systems i.e., systems which clearly act against potential collision are also going into series production.
Active pedestrian protection systems react similarly to emergency braking systems for vehicles traveling in the same direction. However, the environment sensing requirements are different; this can be identified in an analysis of the frequently occurring types of accident.
Causes of accidents Causes of accidents The majority of pedestrian accidents involve persons who cross the road while the vehicle is driving straight ahead. The pedestrian steps out from the side in front of the moving car . Another significant number of pedestrian accidents happen at intersections, particularly when vehicles are turning. Comparison with emergency braking Comparison with emergency braking systems for vehicles traveling in the same systems for vehicles traveling in the same direction direction System responses As already mentioned, the system responses for active pedestrian protection are comparable with emergency braking for vehicles traveling in the same direction. The system responds to an imminent collision with a pedestrian with a warning to the driver together with partial and full braking. As pedestrians frequently step out unexpectedly from a concealed position into the road, often only part of the response cascade, i.e., only the partial and full braking for example, is activated. Environment detection Pedestrians usually step out from the side into the road. Therefore, when compared with emergency braking systems for vehicles traveling in the same direc 
tion, a wider area in front of the vehicle : must be monitored by the sensor system. To make the correct decision on deployment, the sensor system must be able to measure precisely the lateral velocity of pedestrians in particular. Because pedestrians often step out onto the road from a concealed position, sensors must furthermore be able to detect those pedestrians very quickly .
Various sensor configurations for active pedestrian protection are in series production. In this case, both systems which are based on a single sensor and systems which fuse the information from a number of sensors are used. Sensors used are for example mono video cameras, stereo video cameras, or radar sensors.
Situation analysis To assess the traffic situation, assumptions must be made about the future movement of the road users involved i.e., here that of the pedestrian and of the driver's own vehicle. In this way, the system can calculate whether an imminent collision situation can still be averted by the driver or whether an activation of automatic emergency braking is necessary. This prediction is performed in all emergency braking systems , but is particularly challenging in the case of active pedestrian protection. Pedestrians can very abruptly stop in their tracks, start to run, or change direction. These movement possibilities must be taken into account in the system in order to avoid unauthorized system interventions. For example, so as not to risk a rear end collision with the following traffic, the system is not permitted to initiate emergency braking for a pedestrian who steps out onto the road but then stops in time.
In the last case the dummy pedestrian is the height of a child. The dummy pedestrians are able to move their legs and thus realistically mimic a real walking pedestrian. This is necessary since the movement of the legs is sometimes an important attribute in classifying the detected object as a pedestrian, without which automatic emergency braking would not be initiated. Radar sensors detect for example the leg movement of pedestrians via the micro Doppler effect. This is characterized by a minimal oscillation of the pedestrian's measured speed signal.
Up to 60 km/h the system can trigger automatic emergency braking in order to prevent frontal collisions with pedestrians or at the very last mitigate their impact. Operating principle Operating principle In order to trigger automatic emergency braking before an accident occurs, the vehicle must know at all times if there are any objects in the danger zone in front of the vehicle. Radar sensors installed in the vehicle are on the one hand able to detect objects and other road users thanks to radar sensor technology with chirp sequence modulation with a high level of reliability and accuracy, even in adverse weather conditions and poor visibility. On the other hand, cyclists and pedestrians can be detected promptly thanks to their wide aperture angle. In addition, the direction of travel and speed of the vehicle are constantly compared with the data of the pedestrian or cyclist. If the system detects a dangerous situation for pedestrians or cyclists, it can warn the driver and automatically initiate emergency braking if the driver fails to react. In this way, a collision with the endangered road user can be avoided or the vehicle's speed can at least be reduced as much as possible prior to impact if a collision is inevitable. This significantly minimizes the risk of serious injury.
Reverse automatic emergency braking Backing out of a parking space can be a challenge if the driver fails to adequately observe the surroundings behind the vehicle. A fleeting moment of inattention is enough to overlook a pedestrian passing behind a vehicle . Reverse automatic emergency braking for pedestrians reduces this risk as the system monitors the surroundings behind the vehicle and warns of an impending collision. If the driver does not react in time, the system automatically brakes the vehicle. This makes backing out of parking spaces safer and more comfortable.
Environment sensing Environment sensing With the combined use of ultrasonic sensors and near range cameras, the sensor data can be merged in the ECU and a 3D surround view created for a better and more robust understanding of the scene. Other road users, objects, and
DAE1441Y: Emergency braking systems 1923 parking space markings can be detected and understood by means of data fusion. This makes parking functions and automatic emergency braking for vulnerable road users even more reliable and safer. Thus, for example, while the vehicle is being backed out of a parking space, the system detects when a pedestrian is walking past behind the vehicle and relays this information to the brake control system, which then triggers automatic emergency braking.
Safety The predictive pedestrian protection system complies with the NCAP requirements regarding automatic emergency braking. ________________________________ References References A. Georgi, M. Zimmermann, T. Lich, L. Blank, N. Kickler, R. Marchthaler: New approach of accident benefit analysis for rear end collision avoidance and mitigation systems. In Proceedings of 21st International Technical Conference on the Enhanced Safety of Vehicles .
 Commission Regulation No. 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council with respect to type approval requirements for certain categories of motor vehicles with regard to advance emergency braking systems.
 UN ECE R131: Regulation No. 131 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations .
Motivation: Cause of accidents Around 26 % of all accidents involving injury in Germany occur when crossing intersections and turning . Driver assistance systems which are designed to prevent this common type of accident are called intersection assistants. This covers safety functions with the aim of avoiding accidents or mitigating their severity. To achieve this, the driver is alerted at an early stage to an imminent accident or an automatic braking of the vehicle is performed.
Environment sensing Other road users are detected with radar sensors, video cameras or lidar sensors and their distance, speed and direction of movement are determined. The information is processed by the microcomputer of an ECU and evaluated in the form of an object list in software.
Situation assessment An imminent accident is predicted whereby the future position of the vehicles is predicted from the measured positions and speeds of other road users and the motion status of the driver's own vehicle. In the next step the system checks whether the predicted vehicles coincide, which would correspond to an imminent collision. It is however necessary to take into account in this respect that the measured positions and speeds are invalidated by measuring errors. It is furthermore not known exactly how the vehicles will move in future, i.e., whether they will for example brake or steer. Therefore, when it comes to predicting the situation development, driving maneuvers which would avoid an accident must also be taken into account. The less these avoidance maneuvers are possible, the more critical the situation. The situation where an accident cannot be avoided or can only be avoided with difficulty by means of normal handling is called an acute collision risk.
It is particularly difficult to distinguish between critical and non critical situations in intersection scenarios as the vehicles have a large freedom of movement in several direction and the turning behavior of the vehicles involved would have to be predicted several seconds in advance. This is almost impossible, especially when the vehicles involved are being driven in a sporty style. For this reason, an imminent accident can only be unequivocally detected just before the collision.
Unauthorized brake interventions must be avoided without fail as firstly they would not be accepted by the driver and secondly they constitute a potential danger to the following traffic. In certain situations, therefore, automatic emergency braking cannot be activated or can only be activated with a delay. Accident prevention is then no longer possible in some circumstances. If, for example, the driver's vehicle is traveling at high speed, an accident avoiding braking operation would as a rule have to be initiated very early, but this is not possible due to the situational uncertainties and the risk of incorrect deployments.
But even if the system cannot avoid an accident in an individual case, it can mitigate the consequences of the accident through an automatic braking intervention since the impact speed is reduced and the point of impact favorably shifted under certain circumstances.
Left turn assistant : Causes of accidents The left turn assistant is designed to prevent accidents which happen when turning left in the face of oncoming traffic . The accident is usually caused by the driver incorrectly judging the speed of the oncoming vehicle the accident perpetrator turns although there is no longer enough time to complete the maneuver.
braking engages for turning scenarios. An imminent left turn maneuver by the driver can be detected by an evaluation of turn signal, accelerator pedal position, and steering angle.
When the vehicle is stationary in preparation for making a turn and the driver tries to make the turn even though there is a real danger of collision, the driver is warned in a first stage. If there is an acute risk of collision, automatic braking or start prevention is finally initiated. The driver is prevented from moving off until the danger has passed. If the vehicle has already been set in motion despite the risk of collision, the system recognizes the dangerous situation and warns the driver. The driver is then responsible for reacting appropriately.
To avoid the situation where the vehicle in the event of an incorrect response cannot be moved in a potentially dangerous situation, the driver can override the start prevention by means of a kickdown.
Cross traffic assistant: Causes of accidents The cross traffic assistant is designed to prevent accidents which happen when crossing intersections and turning in the face of vehicles that are themselves crossing . Because passengers involved in side collisions are much less adequately protected than in head on collisions due to the lack of crumple zones, the risk of injury is particularly high. Obscurations/obstructions are frequent causes of accidents as well as distracted and inattentive drivers.
Environment sensing As with the left turn assistant, crossing vehicles are detected by environment sensors. Compared to the left turn assistant, however, the field of vision to be covered is much wider a second GPS receiver, whose exact position is known, is used. This generates a correction signal which can be used by other GPS units in the immediate surroundings to correct the interference. Centimeter perfect locating is thus theoretically possible. However, this system is currently still very expensive and therefore cannot be used for series introduction in vehicles. Furthermore, the GPS receiver must be in direct radio contact with a larger number of satellites, which is often not the case in urban canyons.
Traffic light and stop sign : assistants Causes of accidents Unlike the left turn and cross traffic assistants, the traffic light and stop sign assistants are designed not to prevent an imminent collision with other road users, but to prevent the driver from accidentally running a red light or a stop sign. This is intended to prevent accidents which happen as a result of these traffic violations. Environment sensing A video camera equipped with image recognition algorithms scans the vehicle environment for traffic lights and road signs , whereupon their status and their meaning are interpreted. To reduce the risk of erroneous detections, digital maps can be used in which the positions of road signs are marked.
An alternative is offered by car to infrastructure communication . Here, the traffic light for example communicates its status by radio signal to vehicles equipped with special receivers in the surrounding area. Furthermore, the associated stop line must be detected to enable the system response to be sensibly configured in terms of time.
System response If the driver is on the point of not stopping at a red light or a stop sign, a warning is issued first. If the driver then fails to react appropriately, the vehicle can also, depending on the system design, be automatically braked.
A sensible response to the yellow phase is only possible if there is still sufficient distance for a comfortable stopping operation or if the remaining duration of the yellow phase is known for example via C2I.
Another type of traffic light assistance pursues the objective of optimally utilizing the green phases and avoiding unnecessary braking and acceleration phases. Aside from the fluid and comfortable driving style, this is also intended to lower fuel consumption. In this system the traffic lights ahead transmit their traffic light phase and the time until the phase change to approaching vehicles. The speed at which the next traffic light is reached on green is displayed in the instrument cluster.
Motivation: Statistics show that people are exposed to a significant risk of being involved in a serious accident when driving at night. A typical driver when driving at night for the most part does not switch on the high beam and drives on low beam even though activating the high beam is perfectly possible. Some drivers do not engage the high beam at all and continuously drive on low beam. A system with a high beam assistant activates the high beam much more frequently than the typical driver who activates manually and thereby significantly improves the illumination of the road compared to the low beam. The figures from the statistics are very much dependent on the traffic density the lower the density, the greater the use of the high beam. It has also been established that fatigue and lack of concentration causes drivers not to manually turn off the high beam reliably and thus to dazzle other road users.
An automatic system offers a dramatic improvement for all road users. The driver of a vehicle with a high beam assistant experiences a noticeable reduction of the burden and, thanks to automatic activation, a more frequent improvement in illumination. Automatic deactivation of the high beam ensures that drivers of oncoming vehicles are not dazzled.
System designs The high beam assistant automates the process of switching between low beam and high beam. It detects vehicles driving in front and oncoming vehicles and automatically switches the high beam on or off to suit the traffic situation. This significantly increases safety and comfort when driving at night, mainly on highways and expressways.
Basic version The system consists of a light sensitive sensor or a camera, combined with an ECU which controls the headlamps. The camera is either integrated in the rearview mirror or installed in a standalone sensor assembly on the windshield. The camera detects and distinguishes between vehicles and stationary street lights. The system detects oncoming vehicles up to a distance of 600 m and tail lamps of vehicles driving in front up to a distance of 400 m. The positions of detected objects are transmitted to the headlamp ECU, with the data being transmitted via the CAN bus used in the vehicle. The headlamp ECU calculates from the position data whether an object is in the headlamp's beam range and dazzling can occur. The high beam is automatically deactivated if the sensor system detects an object that can be dazzled. If the sensor system does not detect an object, the high beam is automatically activated. The high beam is deactivated even in the presence of street lights for example in urban areas which the system detects and can distinguish from other objects.
The next stage of intelligent headlamp control facilitates adaptive high beam control. This not only controls the range of the light, but also adapts the width of the beam to the traffic conditions. This can, for example, illuminate curves in advance or in urban traffic deliver a wider light cone which can effectively illuminate the edges of the road, ultimately helping the driver to spot any potentially vulnerable pedestrians.
With a further expansion stage of headlamp control the driver can drive with the high beam permanently on. Oncoming traffic or traffic ahead and its position are detected on the basis of camera image analysis. The system is based on horizontally and vertically swiveling headlamps or full LED headlamps in which the entire light distribution is controlled in segments so that on the one hand road users who could potentially be dazzled are not exposed to the light cone . The light distribution from the high beam remains virtually unchanged, while the driver's visual range is increased considerably. Most of the high beam can thus remain switched on and contribute to the driver's safety and comfort without dazzling other road users.
Basic light Matrix system for low beam V V Reutlingen SKB0898 3E
Assistance systems such as the antilock : braking system . Giving motorcycles radar a "sensory organ" makes these new assistance and safety functions for two wheelers possible while providing a accurate picture of the vehicle's surroundings. As a result, these assistance functions not only increase safety, they also enhance enjoyment and convenience by making life easier for riders.
Forward collision warning: In road traffic, even the briefest lapse in concentration can have serious consequences. The forward collison warning for motorcycles reduces the risk of a rear end collision or at the very least mitigates it impact. The system is active as soon as the vehicle starts and it supports the rider in all relevant speed ranges. If the system detects that a vehicle in front is dangerously close and the rider fails to react to the situation, it warns the rider by way of an acoustic or visual signal .
A number of vehicles are detected by the environment sensor system,  danger comes only from the vehicle traveling in front in the same lane. DAE1433 1Y
Interior monitoring enhances safety, com : fort, and convenience for all vehicle occupants. The system for monitoring the vehicle interior from Bosch is able to detect signs of distraction or drowsiness and even whether a child has been left behind in the vehicle, and alerts the driver to critical situations. Safety systems, such as for example the seat belt alert function, are further enhanced by information acquired from the vehicle interior. Besides the various safety relevant applications, the system also provides a range of innovative interaction options, like gesture control for distraction free operation of the infotainment system. Vehicle interior monitoring systems will in future be absolutely essential in automated vehicles for ascertaining whether the driver is able is able to take control of the vehicle in a particular situation. Camera based interior monitoring The modular system provides vehicle manufacturers with a high degree of flexibility when adapting the system to different requirements and vehicle types.
It means the tailored solutions can be implemented quickly and cost effectively, and it allows other systems, such as automated driving, passive safety, and infotainment, to be integrated seamlessly. Driver monitoring Driver drowsiness detection Driver drowsiness detection The driver monitoring camera  monitors the alertness and state of the driver. It can detect distraction, drowsiness, and microsleep and alerts the driver promptly.
Driver identification Driver identification Facial recognition makes it possible for the system to identify the driver with absolute certainty. Using the stored driver profile, the system can then automatically adjust personal comfort and convenience settings such as optimal seat and mirror positions, favorite radio station, or preferred interior temperature.
DAE1415E Vehicle interior External systems, actuators Driver monitoring Interior monitoring Sensors, camera Data analysis and data processing Software ECU Information about driver and occupants
Interior and occupant monitoring: With the interior monitoring system, it is not just the driver who is the focus of attention. The camera is positioned in such a way that all seats are in its field of vision. The system can detect the presence of any other occupants and can then provide more specific reminders to fasten seat belts.
The system is also able to identify whether the front passenger seat is occupied and can thus deactivate the airbag if, for instance, a child safety seat is present. Rising temperatures in the vehicle can quickly become dangerous for a child left behind on the back seat. The system warns the driver in this case too in order to prevent a critical situation like this occurring in the first place.
Safety and convenience The interior monitoring system makes it possible to implement innovative interaction interfaces, such as gesture control. This enables the driver, for instance, to skip to the next song with a simple hand movement without looking away from the road. This reduces distraction and at the same time enhances the "user experience".
Driver monitoring for automated driving In future automated vehicles it will be necessary to know whether the driver is able in critical situations to assume control of the vehicle again.
In automated driving situations the driver can adopt a more relaxed posture because they no longer have to control the vehicle permanently. In dangerous situations the system can determine the seat position and move the occupant into a safe position so that they are afforded optimal protection in the event of a collision.
Automation levels: Driving a car can be fun, but can also be tiring or even dangerous. Driver assistance systems support drivers in difficult driving situations or relieve them of tiresome and monotonous driving tasks.
A trend that has been observed in recent years is the increasing degree of automation of the systems on the market. This trend will continue in the future ) have gained acceptance as the standard worldwide when it comes to classifying the driving functions of continuous automation. There are five different levels. Level 1 Level 1 An assistance system assumes lateral or longitudinal control of the vehicle in a specific application. The driver is supported, but remains responsible.
Level 2 Level 2 The system assumes longitudinal and lateral control in a specific application. The driver is supported, but remains responsible. The driver monitors the system constantly and takes on the delegated tasks where necessary.
Level 3 Level 3 The system takes on the entire driving task in a specific application. The driver no longer has to monitor the system constantly, but must be able to take over the driving task again at any time within a short period of time following a takeover request.
Level 4 Level 4 The system takes on the entire driving task in a specific application. In the event of a fault, responsibility remains with the system, which brings about a safe state; it does not send a takeover request to the driver.
Level 5 Level 5 The system takes over the entire driving task in all applications, for instance in cities, on ordinary roads or expressways/ highways. The user simply inputs a destination and the vehicle navigates to this destination all by itself. In the event of a fault, responsibility remains with the system, which brings about a safe state.
Autonomous driving The logical extension of this development is therefore a system that can permanently perform all the driving tasks without the driver having to monitor the system. The driver becomes a passenger and can use the journey time for other activities, such as for example reading, working or even sleeping.
Further applications would include the vehicle independently looking for a parking space , driving to the garage or taking the children to school without a driver actually having to be in the vehicle. Last but not least, it is hoped to reduce the number of accidents in that a computer controlled system can essentially react faster and more reliably than a person and unlike the driver does not get tired.
Obstacles to automated : driving The idea of driverless driving has been pursued for several decades in numerous research projects. As early as 1986 Professor Dickmanns , the first competition over a longer distance for autonomous vehicles. The DARPA Urban Challenge organized in 2007 involved the autonomously driving vehicles having to perform a range of tasks in quasi urban traffic in a former air force base.
As the various research projects have shown, today it is perfectly possible to build a Level 4 or Level 5 prototype vehicle. But before such vehicles can be put into series production, some technical and non technical obstacles have to be overcome.
Since 2011 Robert Bosch GmbH has been joining various vehicle manufacturers and other suppliers in working on the technologies that are required for automated driving. Since 2013 Bosch has also been running test vehicles in public traffic. Technical obstacles The technical aspects involved are, from a functional standpoint, essentially environment detection, understanding of the situation, and the behavior planning derived from them.
Environment detection Environment detection With regard to environment detection, all aspects of the vehicle's surroundings as are a matter of course to a human driver must be sensed and detected. These aspects include detecting other road users and detecting the road, obstacles that cannot be driven over, and the traffic infrastructure .
Understanding of the situation Understanding of the situation In the final analysis, the gestures of other road users and traffic police officers must also be interpreted. Both the reliable measurement at all times of all these aspects and the processing of the data supplied by these environment sensors are currently still stretched to their limits.
Behavior planning Behavior planning A further functional challenge is to derive appropriate actions it appears that these functional obstacles can be surmounted in the foreseeable future. As for a further technical obstacle, the validation of functional reliability, there is as yet no general solution approved by legislators for series production: A fully automated vehicle naturally may not jeopardize its occupants or other road users in any situation through failures/faults. The failure rate will therefore have to satisfy extremely stringent requirements for a
series production launch. To ensure this, : many millions of kilometers would have to be completed in test drives, which is currently not economically feasible and necessitates the use of simulations.
Legal obstacles Finally, there are also legal obstacles that need to be removed. It is unclear for instance who is liable for the damage/injury caused by a vehicle at automation level 3 or higher when the driver no longer has responsibility for vehicle handling.
Aside from the question of liability, Level 3 and higher automated driving functions in public traffic are currently not legal in many countries. Often there are no binding approval criteria for vehicles with systems at higher automation levels. Furthermore, the regulatory legislation needs to be adapted because driving strategy and behavior in traffic are determined no longer by the driver, but by the algorithms of a technical system.
The responsibilities for the legislation are regulated differently worldwide, resulting in a fragmentation of the requirements. The UNECE has a central role in the goal of harmonizing the requirements.
situations, since they typically occur in the low speed range, the sensors involved only need to have a short range, and the vehicle can be brought to a stop very quickly and with only a minimal stopping distance.
Development of assisting driving functions Assisting driving functions such as adaptive cruise control , lane keeping support, and parking assistant have been established on the market for some years now. And also Level 2 functions such as the traffic jam assistant are now available on the market.
Traffic jam assistant Traffic jam assistant Here the system performs lateral and longitudinal guidance completely in traffic jam situations. At low speeds the driver depending on the functionality does not have to keep his hands on the steering wheel, but does have to monitor the system and intervene if necessary. The traffic jam assistant as a rule functions in a speed range up to 60 km/h.
Highway assistant Highway assistant The highway assistant assumes longitudinal and lateral control at typical expressway/highway speeds . But ultimate responsibility remains with the driver. He must monitor the system so that he can intervene at any time. Depending on the functionality, the highway
Traffic jam pilot and Traffic jam pilot and highway pilot highway pilot The next level of automation if the driver is unable to re assume responsibility for driving. Unlike the highway assistant, the highway pilot assumes responsibility for vehicle handling/guidance. The driver can perform secondary activities, but must where necessary be able to take over the driving task from the system again within a few seconds.
Automated valet parking Automated valet parking On top of the expressway/highway functions, the parking and maneuvering functions are also subject to ever increasing automation. Systems which drive the vehicle independently under human supervision into a parking space are already available .
the vehicle can react immediately. The : technology in the vehicle converts the infrastructure's commands into driving maneuvers. The data acquired by the cameras are processed by the parking garage IT technology to compute the routes and satisfy all the safety requirements. A technical unit which communicates with the vehicle and a cloud connection for interacting with the back end are also required. Once the driver has parked their vehicle in a drop off area in front of the parking garage, the vehicle is safely and efficiently navigated by the system into a vacant parking space. The parking operation comprises the following individual stages : 1. Automatic identification Because an "automated valet parking" space has already been reserved through an app on the smartphone or by the in car infotainment system, the smart infrastructure already identifies the vehicle at the entrance.
2. Simple vehicle drop off The driver comfortably parks their vehicle in the drop off area, gets out, and activates the valet service by smartphone command. From this moment on, the "automated valet parking" infrastructure is in constant communication with the vehicle and navigates the vehicle to a vacant parking space.
3. Driverless access The cameras installed in the parking garage detect vacant parking spaces and monitor the driving corridor and its surroundings.
4. Detection of obstacles If unexpected obstacles such as persons or objects are detected in the surrounding area by the smart "automated valet parking" infrastructure, the vehicle is immediately brought to a stop.
5. Automated driving The vehicle maneuvers itself into the tightest parking space thanks to the "automated valet parking" infrastructure. 6. Additional services Automated valet parking extends the range of possible services, such as for example driverless battery charging while the vehicle is parked in the parking garage. 7. Simple vehicle pick up As soon as the driver is ready to pick up, they activate their vehicle by smartphone and the smart parking garage infrastructure directs the vehicle automatically to the pick up area.
8. Automatic payment Payment is taken automatically at the exit. Depending on the business model, all the partners involves share the parking charge.
Bosch and Daimler have in this connection reached a milestone on the road to automated driving. In summer 2019 the two companies received the approval of the relevant authorities for the automated parking system in the parking garage of the Mercedes Benz Museum in Stuttgart/ Germany. It is therefore the world's first fully automated and driverless parking function in compliance with SAE Level 4 officially approved for everyday use.
Long term goal autonomous driving The logical extension of development is an automation level 5 vehicle that can take the passengers from door to door like a taxi. Here the vehicle must be able to drive autonomously at any time and under all conditions.
Such fully automated systems are also already in development. They are, on account of the absence of driver supervision and thus the absence of a human fallback level, based on a completely different system architecture from classic driver assistance systems.
Thus Level 4 and 5 automated and autonomous systems must have a redundant design. As well as a failsafe power supply for safety relevant system components and redundant actuators , redundant sensor concepts must be used. The goal is therefore to compensate for technological weaknesses in the